Opportunities and Risks of
Artificial Intelligence for
Productivity
Francesco Filippucci
Peter Gal
Katharina Laengle
Matthias Schief
Filiz Unsal
Economics Department, OECD1

Abstract
This article reviews recent evidence and projections on the impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) on productivity growth, with a focus on G7 economies. Drawing on OECD
work and related studies, it synthesizes a range of estimates, suggesting that AI could raise
annual total factor productivity (TFP) growth by around 0.3–0.7 percentage points in the
United States over the next decade. Projected gains in other G7 economies are up to 50
per cent smaller, reflecting differences in sectoral composition and assumptions about the
relative pace of AI adoption. The article compares alternative modeling approaches and
explores key mechanisms underpinning these projections. It also discusses risks —such as
market concentration, algorithmic collusion, and Baumol effects as well as upside potentials
related to innovation, skills, and trade integration through AI-driven efficiency gains.

Reviving sluggish productivity growth is
a crucial issue for most advanced economies
(Goldin et al., 2024; André and Gal,

nificantly impact productivity and growth
in the medium term, drawing on previous OECD work (Filippucci et al., 2024a,

2024). This article discusses the potential of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to sig-

2024b and forthcoming) as well as other
recent literature. Using the framework in

1 The authors are grateful for comments on and contributions to various previous works that fed into this article
by Christophe Andre, Manuel Betin, Flavio Calvino, Alain De Serres, Jonathan Haskel, Asa Johansson, Cecilia
Josa-Lasinio, Tomasz Kozluk, Alvaro Leandro, Giuseppe Nicoletti, Paul Peltier, Alvaro Pereira and Daniel
Rock. The views expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and should not be interpreted as those
of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) or its member countries. Filiz Unsal
is the Head of Structural Policy Research Division, OECD. Peter Gal is a Senior Economist and Deputy Head of
Structural Policy Research Division, OECD. Francesco Filippucci, Katharina Laengle and Matthias Schief are
Junior Economists in the Structural Policy Research Division, Economics Department at the OECD. Emails:
francesco.filippucci@oecd.org, peter.gal@oecd.org, katharina.laengle@oecd.org, matthias.schief@oecd.org and
filiz.unsal@oecd.org.

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

1

these studies, we first provide an assessment of the predicted contribution of AI

al., 2013; Bunel et al., 2024).
These growth projections are larger than

to growth in aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) growth over the next decade
in G7 economies. We then review the risks

those provided by Acemoglu (2024) but
also significantly smaller than some of the
more bullish predictions of other authors

and opportunities that could cause the impact of AI on productivity growth to vary,
either amplifying or reducing it.

that have been widely discussed (see Chart
1). For instance, Briggs and Kodnani
(2023) give an optimistic view based on

Our references for the expected impact of
AI on productivity are the headline projec-

their large aggregate productivity growth
estimates, amounting to around 1 percent-

tion in Filippucci et al. (2024a) and (Filippucci et al., forthcoming), which estimates
that AI could contribute between 0.3 and

age point TFP boost per year. In contrast,
the assessment by Acemoglu (2024) is more
cautious. Using a task-based aggregation

0.7 percentage points to annual aggregate
TFP growth in the United States over the
next decade.2

framework and Hulten’s (1978) theorem, he
suggests that AI will only allow 0.07 percentage points of additional TFP growth

The predicted impacts across different
scenarios are highest in the United States,
followed by the United Kingdom, Germany,

per year. Aghion and Bunel (2024) and
Misch et al. (2025) use the framework in
Acemoglu (2024) but rely on different as-

Canada, France and Italy, and lowest in
Japan. These figures indicate that Generative AI will likely be an important source

sumptions from the literature to arrive at
numbers that are in between but closer to
the optimistic end of the spectrum (around

of aggregate productivity growth over the
next 10 years but also clarify that the ex-

0.7 percentage points boost to TFP).
AI’s impact on productivity and its de-

pected gains from the current generation
of AI technologies may not be extraordinary.3 For comparison, the latest tech-

velopment trajectory entail both upside
and downside risks. On the downside,
anti-competitive outcomes in the provi-

nology driven boom linked to information
and communication technologies (ICT) has
been estimated to have contributed up to

sion of AI can hamper access to affordable, high-quality AI services (André et
al., 2025; Filippucci et al., 2024b; OECD,

1-1.5 percentage points to annual TFP
growth in the United States during the
decade starting in the mid-1990s (Byrne et

2024). We also highlight concerns around
AI-powered business models that exploit
behavioural biases or enable tacit price col-

2 Filippucci et al. (2024a) lays out the conceptual framework to gauge the aggregate productivity gains from AI,
building on Acemoglu (2024), and Filippucci et al. (forthcoming) updates the results based on more recent
evidence on AI adoption rates.

3 Further breakthrough innovations in AI technology are possible and could lead to greater gains over our projection horizon. Future technological developments may also alter the nature of AI technology and how it
interacts with capital and labour to generate productivity gains, especially if significant progress towards Artificial General Intelligence is realized (Trammell and Korinek, 2023). While forecasting the pace and trajectory
of technological advancement in AI is clearly of great importance, it goes beyond the scope of this article.

2

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Chart 1: AI’s Predicted Aggregate TFP Gains Across Different Studies (in percentage
points, annualized)

Note: When the source presents a range of estimates as the main result, the lower and upper bounds are
indicated by dashed areas. In cases where modelling predictions primarily focus on labour productivity, TFP is
obtained using simple assumptions about the aggregate capital multiplier (Acemoglu et al., 2023; Aghion et al.,
2017; Bergeaud, 2024). The estimates refer to the countries shown in brackets.
Sources: See references at the end of the article; for Goldman Sachs (2023), the underlying reference is Briggs
and Kodnani (2023); for IMF (2024) the underlying reference is Rockall et al. (2025); for OECD, the
underlying reference is Filippucci et al. (2024a).

lusion (OECD, 2018 and 2021), as well
as broader risks such as the misuse of AI
in malicious activities (Acemoglu, 2024;

compare our conceptual framework to
other approaches regarding the modelling
of the impact of AI on aggregate productiv-

OECD, 2025) and the threat of Baumol’s
growth disease, where the relative rise of
non-AI impacted, low-productivity growth

ity growth. In section two, we then review
micro-level drivers of productivity gains in
this framework, discuss our interpretation

sectors dampen overall GDP growth (Filippucci et al., 2024a; Baqaee and Farhi, 2019;
Nordhaus, 2008). On the upside, AI can

of the available empirical evidence, and the
assumptions we will derive from this evidence. Next, we examine several aspects

drive productivity gains through faster research, innovation and hence technological
progress (Aghion et al., 2017; Calvino et

that are outside of our framework that can
constitute upside and downside risks to our
quantitative assessment. Important ques-

al., 2025b); by fostering skill development
(Cheon et al., 2025; Mollick et al., 2024);

tions around AI, such as the implications
for inequality or the consequences of fur-

and by boosting trade through lower trade
costs and transmitting efficiencies along
global value chains (WTO, 2024).

ther advances in AI technology towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) are deliberately kept outside the scope of this arti-

In what follows, we first explain and

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

cle.

3

Conceptual Framework

ficiently” means that identical input quantities can produce superior-quality outputs

An Economic View of AI Systems:
Inputs and Outputs

(e.g. visuals that are more engaging or enjoyable for the audience) or a higher volume of output (e.g. creating more videos

According to the OECD,
“an AI system is a machine-based sys-

of equivalent quality employing the company’s labour and capital, in the same
amount of time).

tem that, for explicit or implicit objectives,
infers from the input it receives how to gen-

The operations of AI systems rely on a
few key intangible and tangible assets, of-

erate outputs —such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions —that
can influence physical or virtual environ-

ten complementary to each other (Corrado
et al., 2021). Among intangible inputs,
skills are critical (e.g. highly trained IT en-

ments. Different AI systems vary in their
levels of autonomy and adaptiveness after
deployment” (OECD, 2023c).4

gineers, programmers and data scientists).
Another critical input is software, in the
form of AI models. Such software often re-

Building on this definition, and given
this article’s focus on productivity implications of AI, we propose conceptualizing AI

quires vast quantities of data , which is the
third key intangible component. Data can
take various forms and can enter the sys-

systems as a form of production technology, combining various inputs to generate
productive capabilities (Figure 1). These

tem at various phases: either during the
development phase of AI, which typically
requires large-scale training data used prior

capabilities then allow AI-using firms to
increase their productivity by improving

to deployment, or for its actual use phase
(post-deployment), when additional data

their production processes and other business activities. For instance, AI as a content creator can be employed in the audio-

may be used by the AI model to execute
a query.
Turning to physical (tangible) inputs,

visual and broadcasting sector to more efficiently generate animations and graphics
for videos, harnessing industry-specific tan-

the most important inputs are computing power and connectivity. Advanced
AI systems require top performance semi-

gible and intangible capital (e.g. studios,
network infrastructure, expertise, reputation) alongside labour (e.g. graphic design-

conductor chips or specialized computing infrastructure not only during the
initial, mostly developmental phase (pre-

ers, journalists). In this context, “more ef-

deployment), but also in actual operation,

4 Other definitions in the literature are focused on the comparison with human capabilities. For instance: “AI is
a loose term used to describe a range of advanced technologies that exhibit human-like intelligence including
machine learning, autonomous robotics and vehicles, computer vision, language processing, virtual agents, and
neural networks.” (Furman and Seamans, 2019) or “AI is an umbrella term that refers to a computer system
that is able to sense, reason, or act like a human.” (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025). Recent work jointly carried out
by computer scientists and economists writes: “Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to the science and engineering
of building digital systems capable of performing tasks commonly thought to require intelligence, with this
behaviour often being learned rather than directly programmed” (Sastry et al., 2024).

4

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Figure 1: AI as a Production Technology (provided by upstream firms)

Note: *Positive feedback loop refers mostly to the training, pre-deployment phase. For ease of exposition
regarding the main economic features and implications of AI systems, the terminology may differ from reports
with a more technical focus, notably OECD (2023b).
Source: Author’s elabouration, building on OECD, 2023b, and Sastry et al., 2024.

during the use phase (post-deployment).5
Maintaining such high computing power requires an intensive use of energy, another

with sensors and fine motor capacities, including not only humanoid robots but automated assembly lines – they can also per-

critical input. Finally, high-speed connectivity is necessary especially for performing
user-model interactions during final use of

form physical tasks, as in the case of autonomous vehicles.
Based on their functioning and out-

AI (i.e. inference phase).
The output of AI systems is a set of

puts, a useful distinction can be made between more recent Generative AI on the

productive capabilities. Current AI systems can carry out or assist with cognitive tasks, such as creating content (text,

one hand, and prediction, optimization or
decision-oriented AI on the other hand.
We call the latter non-Generative AI, of-

program code, visuals, etc.) or with taking decisions based on sophisticated predictions, recommendations and optimiza-

ten referred to pre-Generative AI or predictive AI. Non-Generative AI primarily relies on explicit algorithms and probabilis-

tion (Agrawal et al., 2023b). When combined with robotics – machines equipped

tic models to make low-dimensional predictions and recommendations, based on more

5 See Russo et al. (2025) for a discussion and measurement of cloud compute capacity relevant for AI.

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

5

simple machine learning models. Generative AI systems are instead mainly de-

important that it leads to a singularity or
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), which

signed to produce more complex and multidimensional output, i.e. content, such as
text, program code, images, videos, or

is usually defined as an AI that surpasses
human-level intelligence on nearly all cognitive domains.

sounds in response to natural (human) language queries, or prompts. Large Language
Models (LLMs) fall under this category,

AI as a Production Technology for
Users

with ChatGPT by Open AI being a key
example. Generative AI systems are en-

While Figure 1 outlines the key inputs

abled by the “transformer” architecture developed in 2017, which are more efficient
than their predecessors (recurrent neural

for the production of AI technologies, a
related yet distinct question concerns how
these technologies influence the production

networks) because they can process natural language input in parallel rather than
merely in sequence, thus effectively reduc-

of goods and services in industries that
have integrated AI into their production
processes. Following recent technological

ing training and computing time. This
breakthrough allowed for exponential increases in scale and complexity, with the

developments, a distinction emerged in the
AI value chain, with upstream firms specializing in developing AI technology, par-

most refined models featuring billions of
parameters.6
As shown in Figure 1, most current AI

ticularly increasingly powerful and complex
foundational models, while downstream
firms adopt these technologies to enhance

systems are characterized by a positive
feedback-loop, that is, self-improvement

their productivity (André et al., 2025).7
For downstream firms, the primary cost

capacity or learning that can lead to
better performance. On the one hand,
self-improvement may occur while being

is the initial investment needed to successfully integrate AI in their production
processes (e.g. curating firm-specific data

trained, that is optimizing and fine tuning
the model parameters without yet changing
the basic design of the AI model itself (e.g.,

and acquiring skills to tailor and apply AI
tools), which can result in slower adoption
rates. In turn, the marginal user costs of AI

pricing algorithms). On the other hand,
sometimes this process occurs continuously,
while in actual use (technically called infer-

appear to be very low relative to prospective gains, with the quality-adjusted cost of
AI falling fast (André et al., 2025). Hence

ence phase). A distinct future possibility
is that self-improvement of AI becomes so

in the next section, we model the impact of
AI on downstream firms as a pure produc-

6 As an additional distinction, some Generative AI models are considered “foundation” models, given their
broad applicability in a range of fields, as opposed to tailor-made models targeting a specific task. Besides
sophisticated text and software programme code, foundation models can produce sounds, images or video.

7 In addition, a set of intermediaries often leverages foundational models to develop more specific AI-powered
services, for instance customer service bots, search engines, collabouration tools, etc.

6

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Table 1: Comparing AI to Selected Previous General Purpose Technologies (in percentage
points, annualized)
Steam
Engine
Electricity
Physical

and

Computers and Internet
Cognitive routine and
communication
Limited autonomy but not
self-improving
Yes

Artificial Intelligence

Nature of Tasks PriBroad range of cognitive
marily Affected
and complex
Autonomy & SelfCannot operate indepenPotentially autonomous
Improvement
dently from humans
and self-improving
A Method of InvenNo
Yes
tion
Source: Adapted from Filippucci et al. (2024a), building on Lipsey et al. (2005) and Agrawal et al. (2023a).

tivity shock that augments the efficiency
of the users’ production function, allowing

trade and supply chains (Ahn et al., 2024),
or boosts sales through improved market-

firms to produce more output for a given
amount of inputs.
In particular, and in contrast to some

ing and customer service (Hartmann et al.,
2023; Guerron-Quintana et al., 2024; Ni et
al., 2024).

of the previous literature, we view AI as
a transformative technology that can improve the joint productivity of labour and
capital inputs, i.e. as a technology that
increases total factor productivity (TFP).

The Impact of AI on Aggregate Productivity
The rapid advancement of AI has

In other words, in our view, AI should
not be seen merely as a tool for reducing
labour costs, but instead jointly enhancing

sparked debate about its potential to be
a technology that significantly impacts aggregate productivity growth. Historically,

the productivity of workers and the capital used in production (e.g. computers, office equipment, office space). For instance,

these technologies are often the so-called
general-purpose technologies (GPTs), defined by three key characteristics: (1) per-

the AI-driven time savings in writing tasks
documented in Noy and Zhang (2023) imply reductions not only in labour input but

vasiveness, i.e. widespread adoption across
diverse industries; (2) continuous improvement, i.e. ongoing improvements in perfor-

also in the use of capital services per completed task. Therefore, we conclude that

mance and capabilities and; (3) innovation
spawning, i.e. the ability to stimulate innovation in products and processes (Lipsey

AI-induced time savings can be interpreted
as total factor productivity gains.8 Furthermore, it cannot be ruled out that AI

et al., 2005).
A number of studies evaluates the pos-

improves even gross-output based TFP, by
increasing the efficiency of how intermediate inputs are combined with capital and

sibility that AI can be considered a GPT
and provide general support for the idea
based on emerging evidence, although note

labour. This could occur, for example, if
AI optimizes production chains, facilitates

that AI is yet to be fully rolled out (Baily
et al., 2025; Agrawal et al., 2023a; Calvino

8 Supporting evidence comes from the US Census Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) AI Supplement,
which reported that by early 2024, the share of firms using AI to “perform operations previously performed
by existing equipment or software” was roughly three-quarters of those using it to “perform tasks previously
done by employees,” suggesting AI enhances the productivity of both labour and capital.

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

7

et al., 2025b). Table 1 compares the characteristics of AI to previous GPTs, high-

could lead to sharply accelerating, “explosive” economic growth. Nordhaus (2021)

lighting the potential of AI to become a
GPT capable of significantly impacting aggregate productivity in the future. While

and Aghion et al. (2017) similarly explore
the possibility of explosive growth (i.e. singularities) and also discuss the limiting fac-

AI targets a different set of outputs and
tasks than previous GPTs, primarily affecting cognitive and complex functions rather

tors that could prevent such a scenario.
They emphasize that growth may be constrained by a Baumol growth disease type

than physical or routine cognitive ones,
these outputs and tasks represent a broad

effect if parts of the economy remain largely
unaffected by AI even though they are pro-

and growing share of economic activity today.9 In addition, AI possesses a high degree of autonomy, self-improvement poten-

ducing goods and services that are essential
(i.e. face strong demand).In this case, the
sectors with the lowest productivity gains

tial, and can become a “method of invention”, given its ability to generate and test
ideas.

are expected to grow as a share of nominal GDP, thereby reducing the aggregate
importance of productivity gains that AI

Given AI’s strong potential as a GPT, an
emerging literature formally discusses the
aggregate productivity implications of AI.

may achieve in other sectors. A common
feature of all papers on the long-run implications of AI is that they emphasize the po-

It can be divided into two broad strands:
one is mostly theoretical and focuses on
the potential implications of continued ad-

tential productivity gains that could arise
under continued technological advances in
AI rather than quantifying the productivity

vances in AI technology for long-term productivity growth (over several decades),

gains that could be achieved with current
AI technology.

the other is focused on the nearer term
(up to 10 years or so) and draws more directly on existing evidence of the produc-

In contrast, the second strand of the literature starts from the fast-growing body
of empirical evidence on the performance

tivity gains from using current generation
AI technology.
Papers on the long-term growth impli-

gains from adopting available AI solutions
at the individual worker or firm level, and
asks how such microeconomic gains might

cations of AI typically operate with aggregate production functions and focus on
how AI could transform the growth pro-

translate to aggregate productivity growth
over the next decade. Answering this question requires a suitable conceptual frame-

cess, also —or primarily —through impacting research and innovation. In particular,
Trammell and Korinek (2023) discuss how

work that clarifies what elements need to
be considered in such a micro-to-macro approach. An influential contribution in this

transformative AI explore scenarios that

literature is Acemoglu (2024) who proposes

9 The range of tasks influenced by AI could expand even further when combined with complementary technologies
such as robotics (Filippucci et al., 2024a).

8

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Table 2: Comparison of Modelling Choices on Impact of AI on Productivity

Goldman Sachs

Acemoglu

Aghion and Bunel

Filippucci et al.

(2023)*

(2024)

(2024)

(2024a)

27% labour cost

27–40% labour cost

savings

savings

I Assumption about AI
Micro-level productivity
gains / cost savings from

30%

AI**

18.5–68% Based on
Exposure to AI

About two-thirds
of all jobs

20% Based on

Eloundou et al. (2024),

Eloundou et al. (2024)

Gmyrek et al. (2023),
Pizzinelli et al. (2023)

23% Based on cost
Adoption rate of AI

About 50%

effectiveness, following
Svanberg et al. (2024)

23–80% Based on
Svanberg et al. (2024),
Besiroglu and
Hobbhahn (2022)

30% productivity
gains (total cost
savings)
12%–50% (sector
specific; averaging
approx. 35%).
Building on
Eloundou et al. (2024)
23% or 40% Based on
previous GPT
adoption speed and
current sectoral
adoption rates

II Mechanisms captured in the framework
Reallocation across sectors
explicitly modelled?

Partially***

No

No

Yes

Cross-sectoral links explicitly modelled?

No

No

No

Yes

Distributional consequences
modelled?

No

Yes

No

No

Not considered

Not considered

Not considered

Not considered

Innovation

Notes: * Goldman Sachs (2023) refers to Briggs and Kodnani (2023).
** Based on the following assumptions: 7% of all workers are displaced and find new employment; all other
workers remain in their current jobs but become more productive; the structure of the economy (sectoral
composition, prices, etc.) does not adjust.
*** Based on micro-level studies that identify task-level gains from using LLMs.
Source: Filippucci et al. (2024a). For a more detailed discussion, see section 2 in Filippucci et al. (2024a).

to gauge the aggregate productivity gains
from AI by adopting a task-based model

tive increase in aggregate TFP of only 0.7
per cent over a 10-year period. In contrast,

of production and leveraging Hulten’s aggregation theorem (Hulten, 1978). Specifically, Acemoglu suggests computing the ag-

Filippucci et al. (2024a) and Aghion and
Bunel (2024) arrive at substantially larger
growth predictions by following the same,

gregate productivity gain from AI over the
next decade as the product of three numbers: (1) the potential productivity gain in

or similar, strategy, but considering less restrictive assumptions on AI-driven micro
gains, exposure, and adoption compared

“AI exposed” tasks, that is, in tasks that
can be performed more productively with

to those in Acemoglu (2024). These papers find aggregate productivity gains on

the help of AI; (2) the value-added share of
AI exposed tasks; and (3) the AI adoption
rate in AI exposed tasks.

the order of 0.24-1.3 percentage points per
year over the next decade. Bergeaud (2024)
finds similarly large numbers for a range of

Even within this second strand of the literature, studies have reached different conclusions regarding the size of the aggregate

European economies.
In Filippucci et al. (2024a) as well as
its empirical extension to G7 economies in

gains from AI. Acemoglu (2024) finds that
AI-driven productivity gains will be trivial
in the aggregate, amounting to a cumula-

Filippucci et al. (forthcoming), we contributed to this debate in several ways.
First, we reviewed a larger body of evidence

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

9

regarding the task-level gains from AI and
also considered a broader set of scenarios

AI and Aggregate Productivity
in G7 Economies

for AI exposure and AI adoption. Second,
we went beyond the aggregation strategy
proposed in Acemoglu (2024) to explore the

We follow the approach in Acemoglu
(2024) to arrive at aggregate productiv-

possibility that the aggregate gains from AI
may be constrained by a Baumol growth
disease type drag if the productivity gains

ity impacts from AI. This approach allows relating aggregate gains from AI to
three drivers that have an empirical under-

are limited to only a few sectors in the economy. Specifically, we followed a two-step

pinning and thus can be used for quantifying the gains: understanding and mea-

aggregation strategy, in which we first applied the framework in Acemoglu (2024) to
derive estimates of the sectoral gains from

suring the potential gains from AI at the
task level; estimating the economy-wide exposure to AI; and predicting AI adoption

AI. This step revealed large sectoral variation in the expected gains from AI. In a second step, we then used a multi-sector GE

rates in the economy over the next decade.
Below, we discuss each of these determinants separately.

model (borrowing from Baqaee and Farhi
(2019)) to illustrate how differential productivity growth across sectors might give

Task-level Productivity Gains

rise to a Baumol growth disease type effect.
This aggregation strategy also allowed us
to discuss how the size of the Baumol ef-

Filippucci et al. (2024a) review existing
studies that estimate task-level productivity gains thanks to the use of Generative

fect depends on the cross-sectoral elasticity
of substitution in demand and the degree

AI. These micro-level studies are often conducted as controlled experiments, lending

to which factors can be reallocated across
sectors. Table 2 compares the key assumptions and modelling choices in Filippucci et

strong credibility to the estimated effects,
and cover a range of activities, such as customer services activities, software develop-

al. (2024a) with several closely related papers in the literature.
In this article, we build on Filippucci et

ment, or professional writing and business
consulting tasks. The estimates indicate
that the effect of AI tools on worker per-

al. (2024a) and extend the results to other
G7 economies (Filippucci et al., forthcoming). In doing so, our main focus is cross-

formance range from 14 per cent, for example in customer service assistance, to 56
per cent, for example in coding, as shown

country differences in exposure and adoption rates rather than the implications of
sectoral reallocation. We also discuss ad-

in Chart 2.
In particular, Brynjolfsson et al. (2025)
exploited the staggered adoption over time

ditional upside and downside risks to our
projections that could arise inside and out-

of AI-based support to customer service
employees in business process software de-

side our conceptual framework.

veloper companies in 2020-2021, finding a
large and significant increase in the number of case resolutions per worker (labelled

10

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Chart 2: Task-level Productivity Gains from Generative AI

Note: The graph shows the productivity gains reported in different studies, together with 95 per cent
confidence intervals. In parentheses, the reference country and year of the studies are shown.
Source: Filippucci et al. (2024a).

as Customer-service, 2020-21 on Chart 2).
Another study estimated the effect of AI

2023).10
One concern is that these studies were

coding assistants on software developers,
finding an extremely high and significantly

carried out in contexts where performance
gains are most promising and may not ex-

positive effect on the number of coding
tasks completed (Coding —2022; Peng et
al., 2023). Finally, the advent of Chat-

tend to other business contexts and when
AI is used at scale in real-life environments.
However, it is important to note that for

GPT spurred a number of randomized controlled experiments estimating its effect
on workers, finding a large and signifi-

our purposes we need to come up with an
estimate of the average potential productivity gain in AI-exposed tasks, not the av-

cant positive effect of the AI technology:
on the speed and quality of professional
writing tasks (Professional writing – 2022;

erage gain in any task. Still, to remain
conservative, we will assume a 30 per cent
micro-level gain, which is close to the aver-

Noy and Zhang, 2023), business consulting
performances (Business consulting – 2023;
Dell’Acqua et al., 2023), and time and qual-

age of the three most precise estimates and
excludes studies on coding, where the productivity gains from AI may be particularly

ity of writing tasks for a sample of workers
(General writing – 2023; Haslberger et al.,

large.
More recent OECD research spans an

10 A number of studies have also examined the firm-level impact of pre-generative AI technologies, albeit without
relying on experimental or quasi-experimental methods. These studies generally report positive and statistically significant effects (Figure A.1 in the Appendix), suggesting relatively substantial task-level productivity
gains and exposure already from pre-generative AI in specific contexts.

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

11

even broader range of findings from the
rapidly growing literature (Calvino et al.,

count for only a portion of total economic
activity. To quantify to what extent AI can

2025b). In language translation, Lyu et
al. (2023) show significant improvements
in generative AI’s performance, while Mer-

potentially impact tasks, tasks are categorized based on whether they are exposed
to AI. A task is exposed to AI if it can be

ali (2024) finds that enhanced AI capabilities allow translators to work faster,
produce better outputs, and earn more,

performed more effectively with the help of
AI. Acemoglu (2024) and Filippucci et al.
(2024a) rely on estimates of task-level ex-

especially benefiting lower-skilled translators. In medical imaging, AI can deliver

posure to AI from Eloundou et al. (2024).12
This article evaluates for each task in the

useful predictions, even if radiologists still
hesitate to fully trust these AI-generated
predictions (Mullainathan and Obermeyer,

detailed US-based occupational database
O*NET whether it can be performed at
least 50 per cent faster with the help of

2019). In legal contexts, AI helps summarize complex judgments (Deroy et al.,
2024), correctly assess simple questions

AI or with AI integrated with additional
software.
We distinguish between two different

about legal issues and interpretation (Choi
and Schwarcz, 2023; Schwarcz et al., 2025)
but also improve judicial decisions (Klein-

measures of exposure. The first measure,
which we label baseline exposure, is based
on the median estimate from Eloundou et

berg et al., 2018). In some of these instances, the gains from AI are of comparable magnitude to the ones in Chart 1 or

al. (2024). Note that this estimate relies
only on what were Large Language Models (LLM) capabilities at the time of their

even larger (Schwarcz et al., 2025).11

study, in 2023, and thus excludes subsequent and future improvements in AI.13

The Exposure of Tasks to AI by Sectors
Although AI can assist with a broad array of tasks, as discussed earlier, these ac-

Therefore, our second measure accounts
of AI exposure with expanded capabilities
fully considers as AI-exposed those tasks
where additional software could be developed on top of LLMs, reducing the time
it takes to complete the task by at least
half. We interpret this measure as a more

11 Firm-level evidence on pre-generative AI suggest gains that appear to be of a smaller magnitude, similar to the
gains from other ICT technologies, although causal identification is more challenging than in the experimental
settings at the task level – see Figure A.1 in the Appendix.

12 An alternative, earlier measure is developed by Felten et al. (2021) which shows strong correlation with
Eloundou et al. (2024)

13 Eloundou et al. (2024) refer to their median estimate as the measure.
14 Eloundou et al. (2024) also offer a third exposure measure, which they label “automation index” and which
is meant to capture whether a work activity can be autonomously performed by AI. Specifically, this more
restrictive exposure measure requires that LLMs can complete at least 90 per cent of the task autonomously.
It is this exposure measure that is used in Acemoglu (2024), which partly explains why he finds smaller
productivity gains from AI compared to Aghion and Bunel (2024) or Filippucci et al. (2024a).

12

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Chart 3: AI Exposure in G7 Countries

Note: This chart reports the average share of tasks exposed to AI across G7 economies. Country-level averages
are obtained by mapping granular task-level exposure from Eloundou et al. (2024) (relying on LLM capabilities
as of 2023) to occupations within different sectors. This approach distinguishes the occupational composition of
43 sectors (ISIC Rev. 4) which are aggregated to the country-level using respective 2019 pre-pandemic value
added shares of different sectors. Due to a lack of data, the occupational composition of industries in Japan is
assumed to be the same as in the G7 average.
Source: Filippucci et al. (2024a).

forward looking one, more likely to capture
average exposure over our projection hori-

tivity – industries such as ICT, finance,
and professional services, which are more

zon.14
Starting from task-level estimates, we
calculate the average AI exposure of de-

exposed to AI, contribute more to value
added in some countries than in others –
and to a lesser extent from variation in

tailed occupations based on the O*NET
dataset. For each G7 country, we then

the occupational composition within industries, as some countries have a higher incidence of AI-intensive roles (e.g., coders,

aggregate occupations into industries and
compute aggregate exposure, weighting
each industry by its value-added share in

translators, or accountants) in specific industries. Overall, the differences in ex-

the national economy. Chart 3 presents the
resulting country-specific estimates of AI
exposure, ranging between 30 and 35 per

posure among G7 countries are such that
the most exposed country reports levels approximately 15 per cent higher than the

cent for baseline AI capabilities and around
50 per cent for expanded AI capabilities.
These are substantial figures but far from

least exposed one.

covering the whole economy.
Cross-country variation arises from differences in the structure of economic ac-

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

Projected AI Adoption Rates
Aggregate productivity gains from AI
can only be realized if AI technology is ac-

13

Chart 4: AI Adoption Paths Following Previous General Purpose Technologies

Source: adapted from Filippucci, Gal and Schief (2024), building on United States Census (internet and
computers) and Woolf (1987) for electricity adoption of businesses and United States Census Bureau, Business
Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) for AI adoption.

tually used i.e. adopted, by firms. Hence,

perience with previous major GPTs, such

to assess the economy-wide magnitude of
these gains, we need to project the economy wide AI adoption rate into the future.

as electricity, computers, or the internet.
Chart 4 shows the adoption rates among
firms for these technologies in the United

Consistent with the literature, we aim at
predicting productivity gains over a 10-year
projection horizon and therefore project AI

States during the first 10 years after a
user-friendly breakthrough becomes available (taken to be the appearance of Chat-

adoption rates of the next decade.
The rate at which AI applications will
spread throughout the economy depends

GPT in the case of AI). According to this
historical experience, adoption rates can be
expected to rise by approximately 23 to 40

on many different factors, such as their
user-friendliness, their cost effectiveness,

percentage points over a 10-year period.
Given the considerable uncertainty

the need for complementary investments,
the availability of data centers and other
types of infrastructure, the general degree

around future adoption rates, we consider
two scenarios. Our slow adoption scenario
of a 23 percentage point increase is in line

of business dynamism, or even cultural factors shaping the readiness of workers to
embrace AI tools. Predicting AI adop-

with the relatively slow adoption path of an
earlier technology, electricity. In contrast,
our rapid adoption scenario is in line with

tion rates over the next decade is therefore a challenging task. That said, it can
be instructive to consider the historical ex-

the adoption path of digital technologies in
the workplace such as computers and the
internet. Acemoglu (2024) also assumed

14

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Chart 5: AI Adoption Among Firms in 2024 and Projections for 2034, in Per cent per
year

Note: This chart presents the current AI adoption and its projected increase across G7 countries within 10
years. Predictions are based on extrapolations of comparable current AI adoption rates, derived through data
harmonisation and out-of-sample predictions with digital infrastructure quality and skills as determinants.
Extrapolations are in line with previous General Purpose Technologies electricity (slow adoption scenario) and
computers/ internet (rapid adoption scenario).
Source: Authors’ calculations (Filippucci et al., forthcoming).

a 23 per cent adoption rate adoption over
10 years (compared to approximately zero

and by relying on key fundamental determinants of adoption (digital infrastructure

in the base year) based on an argument
about the cost-effectiveness of a specific AI
technology (computer vision), reported in

quality and skills) to capture adoption capacity. The estimates for current AI adoption rates for each country are then extrap-

Svanberg et al. (2024). Incidentally, we
note that our 40 percentage point adoption
increase scenario approximately coincides

olated using the two scenarios of AI adoption: a slow and a rapid adoption pathway,
following an S-shaped adoption path which

with a more optimistic scenario in Svanberg
et al. (2024) that allows for improvements

was observed for previous major technologies (Hall, 2009; Geroski, 2000; Tankwa et

in the cost effectiveness of the technology.
To analyse the productivity implications
of AI for countries other than the United

al., 2025, building on Griliches, 1957 and
Rogers, 1962). This implies an accelerating speed of adoption in the initial diffu-

States, these future AI adoption rate projections (shown in Chart 4) need to be
adapted to the context of other countries.

sion phase of the technology, followed by
a slowdown later on as adoption reaches a
saturation level. Chart 5 shows the pre-

Our projections are based on comparable
current AI adoption rates across G7 countries, derived through data harmonisation

dicted increase in AI adoption across G7
economies between 2024 and 2034.
Even the rapid adoption scenario of a 40

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

15

percentage point increase in 10 years could
seem relatively conservative in light of the

discussed our best estimates of the average
task-level productivity gains that might be

fact that AI is generally considered a particularly user-friendly technology. On the
other hand, systemic adoption of AI in the

achieved in AI-exposed tasks, the share of
AI-exposed tasks within economies, and
the likely AI adoption rates. This sub-

core business functions of firms may still
require substantial complementary investments in a range of intangible assets, in-

section addresses the question of how to
use these estimates to derive the implied
aggregate productivity gains. This is not a

cluding data, managerial practices, and organization (Agrawal et al., 2022). Such

trivial task, because productivity shocks at
the microeconomic level also cause changes

investments are not only costly but also
require experimentation and learning-bydoing, which may slow down adoption.

in the structure of the economy (e.g. reallocation of factors across sectors, changes in
the input-output structure of the economy,

Another risk to these scenarios is that
they focus on a single, economy-wide adoption rate, implicitly assuming it is homoge-

changes in relative output prices), which all
potentially matter for aggregate productivity growth.

nous across economic activities. In practice, however, firms and workers who carry
out economic activities with stronger AI

In a seminal contribution, Hulten (1978)
showed that aggregate productivity gains
can, to a first order, be approximated as an

exposure may also be more likely to adopt
AI as they may find it more profitable to integrate AI in their business processes, given

appropriately weighted sum of the microeconomic productivity changes. The theorem applies in any competitive economy

the higher returns associated with higher
exposure. A positive relationship between

with constant returns to scale, irrespective of underlying structural features of the

adoption and exposure would increase the
share of AI-exposed tasks in the overall
economy where AI is adopted, compared to

economy, such as the network of inputoutput linkages or the elasticities of substitution in production and consumption.15

our situation focusing only on overall adoption rates. This in turn would lead to larger
aggregate gains than presented here.

In this spirit, we follow Acemoglu (2024)
and leverage Hulten’s theorem to approximate aggregate TFP gains over the next

Aggregate Productivity Gains

decade as a simple multiplication of our
estimates for micro gains, current AI exposure, and the projected increase in AI

In the preceding sub-sections, we have

adoption over the next ten years. The cor-

15 Hulten’s theorem is an implication of the envelope theorem. Intuitively, because equilibrium allocations in a
competitive economy correspond to the solution of the social planner’s problem, small changes in allocations
around the equilibrium have only negligible effects on aggregate productivity, and the aggregate impact of
micro-level productivity shocks reflect the Lagrange multipliers on the resource constraints. If the micro units
are firms or sectors and production features input-output linkages and if productivity gains are measured as
gross output-based TFP growth, then a micro unit’s weight is the ratio of its gross sales to GDP and the
sum of these (Domar) weights can exceed one. In our setting, the micro units are tasks and we do not model
input-output linkages between tasks. In this case, the weights are given by the micro units’ value-added shares.

16

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

responding formula reads as follows.
Aggregate Productivity Growthc,[t,t+10]
= Micro Level Gains
× Exposurec × ∆Adoption Ratec,[t+10]
Chart 6 shows the resulting projections
of aggregate productivity gains from AI
across G7 economies annualized over a 10year time horizon. Predictions on the contribution of AI to annual TFP growth over
the 10-year time horizon differ significantly
across G7 economies and scenarios. Across
countries, these range from 0.11 to 0.27
percentage points under the slow adoption scenario, and from 0.34 to 0.66 percentage points under the rapid adoption
and expanded capabilities scenario. Cross-

from AI to the extent that additional productivity gains can result from broader AIdriven innovations in organizational structures and business models. Such gains
would not be observed at the level of individual tasks but would emerge in the productive reconfiguration of the interlinkages
between existing work tasks or in the creation of entirely new tasks.
More generally, AI could improve the
process of research and innovation. Aghion
et al. (2017) emphasize that AI will not
only affect the production function of goods
and services, but also the “idea production function”. If AI can increase the rate
of technological progress, the productivity

country differences across these projections
reflect country differences regarding the oc-

gains over the next decade could be larger
than what we predicted. Aghion et al.
(2017) and Trammell and Korinek (2023)

cupational composition within sectors, to
a lesser extent, and more importantly, the
sectoral value-added shares and projections

discuss the possibility that such a scenario
leads to explosive growth in the medium

of AI adoption rates more importantly.

Upside and Downside Risks for
AI Productivity Projections
There are several reasons why the growth
projections in Chart 6 could overstate or
understate the productivity gains from AI.
While some of these reasons have been discussed in the context of the aggregation
framework in the previous sections, other
reasons go beyond this framework and are
discussed below.

AI’s Impacts on Innovation and Research
The projected productivity gains in
Chart 6 could understate the true gains

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

term, while also pointing to possible limiting factors, such as Baumol’s growth disease (discussed below).
There is empirical evidence of AI increasing the productivity of researchers
and boosting innovation. Calvino et al.
(2025b) review the existing literature and
show that generative AI accelerates innovation in academia and the private sector.
Specifically, it supports research by helping humans develop novel ideas or by executing research tasks and freeing up time,
which allow researchers to focus on those
tasks that require human expertise. AI
patents are cited by follow-on innovations
in a broad number of application areas,
supporting the general-purpose nature of
AI as a technology, and there is evidence
of positive feedback loops from follow-on
innovation back to generative AI innova17

Chart 6: Projected Aggregate TFP Gains from AI Over a Decade in G7 Countries (in
percentage points, annualized)

Source: Adapted from Filippucci et al. (forthcoming)

tion, supporting the notion that AI could
trigger a virtuous cycle of continuously in-

ing AI development with societal goals and
closely monitoring potentially harmful de-

creasing productivity growth (Calvino et
al., 2025a).
At the same time, AI-driven techno-

velopments, as highlighted by ongoing initiatives such as the OECD.AI Incidents and
Hazards Monitor (OECD, 2025).

logical developments may not always contribute positively to welfare – some may
increase measured productivity while re-

Baumol’s Growth Disease

ducing social value. For instance, AI
could enable the creation of “bad” tasks
– such as manipulative advertising or ad-

The projected TFP gains shown in Chart
6 are derived under the assumption that
sectoral GDP shares remain unaffected by

dictive digital content – that generate revenue at the cost of well-being (Acemoglu,

AI-driven productivity growth. This aggregation approach can lead to an over-

2024). Moreover, malicious applications,
including AI-enabled cyberattacks, could
destroy value and undermine economic per-

estimation of the aggregate gains from AI
if the sectors with the fastest productivity
growth shrink as a share of GDP. Histor-

formance. Longer-term concerns include
the possibility of advanced AI systems
with self-improvement capabilities outpac-

ically, sectors experiencing faster productivity growth have in fact tended to see decreases in their GDP shares (driven by de-

ing human control and raising existential
safety risks (Nordhaus, 2021; Jones, 2023;
Bostrom, 2014; Suleyman and Bhaskar,

clines in relative output prices and employment shares), thus reducing aggregate productivity growth – a phenomenon known

2023). These scenarios, though speculative, underscore the importance of align-

as Baumol’s growth disease (Baumol, 1967;
Nordhaus, 2008).

18

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Traditionally, Baumol’s growth disease
is discussed in the context of the rising

these complementary assets are not fully
captured yet in standard official statistics

GDP share of low-productivity growth services. Although AI-driven productivity
growth may benefit some of the sectors

(e.g. National Accounts) (Brynjolfsson et
al., 2021). This leads to a productivity
J-curve, characterizing the adoption of a

that have experienced limited productivity
growth in the past, the mechanisms underlying Baumol’s growth disease should still

new General Purpose Technology: in the
early phase of adoption, both capital inputs and output are under-measured due to

apply. In particular, if demand for the output of the least AI-augmented sectors is

unaccounted intangible investments, leading to an underestimation of productivity

relatively price-inelastic, then the expenditure share on these sectors would grow.
As Aghion et al. (2017) note, AI-driven

improvements. In the later phase, once
the complementary investments begin to
bear fruit but remain unmeasured, mea-

growth may then be constrained “not by
what we do well but rather by what is essential and yet hard to improve.”

sured productivity may be overstated, as
output gains are attributed to technology
alone rather than to prior investment.

Filippucci et al. (2024a) analyze how
sectoral heterogeneity in AI-driven productivity gains may give rise to a Bau-

Competition

mol effect over the medium term. Using
a multi-sector general equilibrium model,
they show that the size of the effect de-

AI could further complicate existing
competition issues in digital markets
and introduce new market failures that

pends on sectoral productivity patterns,
demand elasticities, and whether factors of

threaten its anticipated productivity benefits. Competition concerns may emerge

production can be easily reallocated across
sectors. Under their most pessimistic scenarios, a Baumol effect could reduce AI’s

both upstream in the supply of AI and
downstream in its user applications that
risk undermining productivity growth by

aggregate productivity gains by up to onethird.

limiting access to AI technologies and reinforcing market concentration (Filippucci
et al., 2024b; OECD, 2024).

J-curve Dynamics
As with previous GPTs, generative AI

Especially with the advent of Generative
AI (LLMs and image generators, etc.), the
upstream market of AI, i.e. AI develop-

may experience a productivity paradox,
where improvements in productivity are
not immediately apparent. Realising these

ment, depends on a complex value chain
involving computing infrastructure, vast
datasets, and specialized expertise, where

gains often require additional, complementary investments in a range of intangi-

economies of scale and network effects can
lead to market concentration and barriers

ble assets such as workforce skill enhancement, organizational restructuring, data,
software or innovation in general. Some of

to entry (Nicoletti et al., 2023). Larger
datasets and computing power boost AI
performance —a dynamic known as “scal-

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

19

ing laws” (Kaplan et al., 2020) —giving
an advantage to established firms with

Trade and Global Access

proprietary resources and infrastructure
(CMA, 2023). However, open-source models and supportive policies around data ac-

In the context of international trade, AI
presents both upside and downside risks.
The benefits of AI for trade are not auto-

cess and infrastructure could counteract
these trends by fostering competition and
inclusion. Despite concerns about concen-

matic, and access to AI itself faces downside risks if trade in digital services – including AI provided services – or ICT as-

tration, the market for foundation models
currently shows signs of dynamism, with a

sets become fragmented. Indeed, limited
cross-border access to competitively priced

growing number of models, suppliers, and
improving performance at decreasing costs
(André et al., 2025).16

and high-quality AI tools could hold back
AI adoption of companies outside countries
that develop such advanced AI models, and

The use of AI can also raise significant
competition concerns downstream, particularly when AI-powered business models ex-

could also restrict innovation on the developer’s front. Moreover, trade restrictions
on hardware components that are critical

ploit consumer biases or personalize pricing
in non-transparent ways. Such practices
can manipulate consumer choices, promote

for AI training and inference, e.g. advanced
semiconductors, could create bottlenecks
that stifle technological progress.

low-quality products (Calo, 2013), or enable discriminatory pricing, especially in
opaque online markets (OECD, 2018). AI

On the upside, AI has the potential
to lower trade costs and stimulate trade
flows by reducing non-tariff barriers such

recommender systems may reinforce market concentration by boosting attention to

as adapting to regulatory complexity and
differences or to language obstacles. AI

already-dominant products (Calvano et al.,
2023), while “killer acquisitions” of emerging firms by incumbents can further limit

tools can automate summarizing legal and
regulatory documents, enhance translation
accuracy, and streamline compliance pro-

market contestability. These trends risk
stifling innovation and slowing AI adoption in less competitive sectors. Addition-

cesses —developments that are particularly
beneficial for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which often lack the re-

ally, AI systems may facilitate tacit or algorithmic collusion, especially in pricing, by
enabling autonomous coordination among

sources to overcome such barriers (Rubinova and Sebti, 2021). These advancements can make trade more inclusive and

firms without explicit agreements (OECD,
2021).

efficient. Moreover, AI-driven productivity gains can ripple through global value

16 For instance, André et al. (2025) find that the capabilities of the large language model that showed the
highest performing on industry benchmark tests in March 2023 (GPT-4 by OpenAI) are achieved by open
source models in February 2025, which are accessible on the cloud at less than one-hundredth of the price that
OpenAI charged two years ago. The finding that this segment of the AI market seems more dynamic than
initially feared is also consistent with the conclusions of Hagiu and Wright (2025), although it is important to
stress that these are still early days when market players experiment with different business models.

20

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

chains (GVCs) via improved process planning, better quality intermediates, and

and related literature, we discussed how
AI—particularly generative models—could

lower input costs, ultimately benefiting
both producers and consumers across borders (WTO, 2024).

become a major driver of total factor
productivity (TFP) growth over the next
decade. Benchmark estimates suggest that

Impact on Skill Development

AI may contribute between 0.3–0.7 percentage points to annual TFP growth in the
United States, with somewhat lower but

Generative AI is also reshaping human
capital development – an essential engine of

still substantial impacts expected in other
G7 economies. These effects, while smaller

long-term growth – by enhancing learning,
re-skilling, and problem-solving in both
educational and workplace environments

than those observed during the ICT boom,
are significant in the context of persistently
sluggish productivity growth.

(OECD, 2023a). In particular, AI personalizes instruction and delivers outsized
gains for lower-proficiency learners (Cheon

Despite these promising projections, several important sources of uncertainty remain. First, the macroeconomic impact of

et al., 2025; Mollick et al., 2024). It can
also enable students to complete tasks more
efficiently (Zhang et al., 2024; Urban et al.,

AI will depend critically on adoption dynamics —both the speed and breadth of
diffusion across firms and sectors—as well

2024) and may function as an on-demand
subject-matter expert and search tool for
educators and learners (Kestin et al., 2024).

as the ability of laggard firms to catch
up. Second, the full productivity benefits
of AI are likely to hinge on complemen-

Finally, it can also provide cost-effective tutoring in low-resource settings (Henkel et

tary investments in intangible assets, such
as data infrastructure, skills, and organiza-

al., 2024; De Simone et al., 2025). These
developments could provide indirect productivity benefits from AI through improv-

tional adaptation, much of which remains
unmeasured in national statistics.
Moreover, AI may generate risks that

ing human capital. On the other hand, skill
acquisition in the schooling system may be
hampered if AI tools end up having long-

could dampen or delay its productivityenhancing effects. These include rising
market concentration in AI supply chains,

term negative effects on skill acquisition,
and they are nonetheless used to obtain
short-run benefits by students.

potential abuses of market power, algorithmic collusion, and uses of AI that prioritizes automation over quality or wel-

Concluding Remarks

fare. Broader societal risks—including misinformation, loss of trust, and misalignment between AI systems and human ob-

This article has reviewed the potential impact of Artificial Intelligence

jectives—could also slow down adoption
and trigger policy responses that restrict

(AI) on productivity growth, with a focus on medium-term projections for G7
economies. Drawing on recent OECD work

diffusion.
Future research should aim to better
quantify the general equilibrium implica-

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

21

tions of AI adoption, develop more robust
cross-country adoption metrics, and assess
how various policy levers—from competition enforcement to digital infrastructure
investment— shape outcomes. Given the
pace of technological progress and the magnitude of the stakes involved, deepening the
empirical and theoretical understanding of
AI’s productivity effects remains an urgent
task.

References
Acemoglu, D. (2024) "The Simple Macroeconomics of AI," Economic Policy, August, p.
eiae042.
Acemoglu, D., D. Autor, and S. Johnson (2023)
"Can We Have Pro-Worker AI?: Choosing a
Path of Machines in Service of Minds," in J.
Fagerberg and D. C. Mowery (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation.
Aghion, P. and S. Bunel (2024) "AI and Growth:
Where Do We Stand," Technical Report, Mimeo
LSE.
Aghion, P., B. F. Jones, and C. I. Jones (2017)
"Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth,"
NBER Working Paper No. 23928.
Agrawal, A., J. Gans, and A. Goldfarb (2022)
Power and Prediction: The Disruptive Economics of Artificial Intelligence, Harvard Business Press.
Agrawal, A., J. Gans, and A. Goldfarb (2023a)
"Similarities and Differences in the Adoption of
General Purpose Technologies," NBER Working
Paper.
Agrawal, A., J. Gans, and A. Goldfarb (2023b)
"The Turing Transformation: Artificial Intelligence, Intelligence Augmentation, and Skill Premiums," NBER Working Paper No. 31767.
Ahn, H.-I., S. Olivar, H. Mehta, and Y. C.
Song (2024) "Generative Probabilistic Planning
for Optimizing Supply Chain Networks," arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.07511.
André, C., and P. Gal (2024) "Reviving Productivity Growth: A Review of Policies," OECD
Economics Department Working Papers.
André, C., M. Betin, P. Gal, and P. Peltier (2025)
"Developments in Artificial Intelligence Markets: New Indicators Based on Model Characteristics, Prices and Providers," OECD Artificial
Intelligence Papers.
Baily, M., D. Byrne, A. Kane, and P. Soto
(2025) "Generative AI at the Crossroads: Light
Bulb, Dynamo, or Microscope?" arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.14588.

22

Baqaee, D. R., and E. Farhi (2019) "The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks: Beyond Hulten’s Theorem," Econometrica, Vol.
87, No. 4, pp. 1155–1203.
Baumol, W. J. (1967) "Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No. 3, pp.
415–426.
Bergeaud, A. (2024) "The Past, Present and Future of European Productivity," Technical Report, ECB Forum on Central Banking, July.
Besiroglu, T., and M. Hobbhahn (2022) "Trends
in GPU Price-Performance," Technical Report.
Bostrom, N. (2014) Superintelligence: Paths,
Dangers, Strategies, Oxford University Press.
Briggs, J., and D. Kodnani (2023) "The Potentially Large Effects of Artificial Intelligence on
Economic Growth," Goldman Sachs.
Brynjolfsson, E., D. Rock, and C. Syverson (2021)
"The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles
Complement General Purpose Technologies,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 333–372.
Brynjolfsson, E., D. Li, and L. Raymond (2025)
"Generative AI at Work," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, p. qjae044.
Bunel, S., G. Bijnens, V. Botelho, E. Falck, V.
Labhard, A. Lamo, O. Röhe, J. Schroth, R. Sellner, J. Strobel, and B. Anghel (2024) "Digitalisation and Productivity," ECB Occasional Paper Series No. 339.
Byrne, D., S. D. Oliner, and D. Sichel (2013) "Is
the Information Technology Revolution Over?,"
International Productivity Monitor, No. 25, pp.
20–36. https://www.csls.ca/ipm/25/IPM-25-B
yrne-Oliner-Sichel.pdf
Calo, M. R. (2013) "Digital Market Manipulation,"
SSRN Electronic Journal.
Calvano, E., G. Calzolari, V. Denicolo, and S.
Pastorello (2023) "Artificial Intelligence, Algorithmic Recommendations and Competition,"
SSRN Electronic Journal.
Calvino, F., and L. Fontanelli (2023) "A Portrait
of AI Adopters Across Countries," Technical Report 2023/02, OECD, April.
Calvino, F., D. Haerle, and S. Liu (2025) "Is Generative AI a General-Purpose Technology? Implications for Productivity and Policy," OECD
Artificial Intelligence Papers (forthcoming).
Calvino, F., J. Reijerink, and L. Samek (2025)
"The Effects of Generative AI on Productivity, Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Evidence
from Recent Experiments," Technical Report
(forthcoming).
Cheon, G., Y. Choi, D. Lee, and J. Baek (2025)
"Generative AI Agents in Language Learning: A
Randomized Field Experiment," Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Human Computation
and Crowdsourcing, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 76–85.

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Choi, J. H., and D. Schwarcz (2023) "AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: An Empirical Study."
Competition and Markets Authority (2023) "AI
Foundation Models: Initial Report."
Corrado, C., J. Haskel, and C. Jona-Lasinio (2021)
"Artificial Intelligence and Productivity: An Intangible Assets Approach," Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 435–458.
Dell’Acqua, F., K. R. Lakhani, H. Lifshitz-Assaf,
M. L. Tushman, and K. C. Kellogg (2023) "Navigating the Jagged Technological Frontier: Field
Experimental Evidence of the Effects of AI on
Knowledge Worker Productivity and Quality,"
Harvard Business School Working Paper No.
24-013.
Deroy, A., K. Ghosh, and S. Ghosh (2024) "Applicability of Large Language Models and Generative Models for Legal Case Judgement Summarization," Artificial Intelligence and Law, pp.
1–44.
Eloundou, T., S. Manning, P. Mishkin, and D.
Rock (2024) "GPTs are GPTs: Labour Market
Impact Potential of LLMs," Science, Vol. 384,
No. 6702, pp. 1306–1308.
Felten, E., M. Raj, and R. Seamans (2021) "Occupational, Industry, and Geographic Exposure to
Artificial Intelligence: A Novel Dataset and Its
Potential Uses," Strategic Management Journal,
Vol. 42, No. 12, pp. 2195–2217.
Filippucci, F., P. Gal, and M. Schief (2024a) "Miracle or Myth? Assessing the Macroeconomic
Productivity Gains from Artificial Intelligence,"
Technical Report No. 29, Paris.
Filippucci, F., P. Gal, C. S. Jona Lasinio, A. Leandro, and G. Nicoletti (2024b) "The Impact of
Artificial Intelligence on Productivity, Distribution and Growth."
Filippucci, F., P. Gal, K. Laengle, and M.
Schief (forthcoming) "Macroeconomic Productivity Gains from Artificial Intelligence in G7
Economies," Technical Report, Paris.
Furman, J., and R. Seamans (2019) "AI and the
Economy," Innovation Policy and the Economy,
Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 161–191.
Geroski, P. A. (2000) "Models of Technology Diffusion," Research Policy, Vol. 29, No. 4–5, pp.
603–625.
Gmyrek, P., J. Berg, and D. Bescond (2023) "Generative AI and Jobs: A Global Analysis of
Potential Effects on Job Quantity and Quality," ILO Working Paper No. 96, International
Labour Organization, Geneva.
Goldin, I., P. Koutroumpis, F. Lafond, and J.
Winkler (2024) "Why is Productivity Slowing
Down?," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
62, No. 1, pp. 196–268.
Griliches, Z. (1957) "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration
in the Economics of Technological Change,"
Econometrica, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 501–522.

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

Guerrón-Quintana, P., T. Mikami, and J. Nosal
(2024) "The Macroeconomic Implications of the
Gen-AI Economy," Available at SSRN: https:
//ssrn.com/abstract=4989979.
Hagiu, A., and J. Wright (2025) "Artificial Intelligence and Competition Policy," International
Journal of Industrial Organization, Article No.
103134.
Hall, B. H. (2009) "Innovation and Diffusion," in
J. Fagerberg and D. C. Mowery (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation, Oxford University
Press.
Hartmann, J., Y. Exner, and S. Domdey (2023)
"The Power of Generative Marketing: Can Generative AI Reach Human-Level Visual Marketing Content?," SSRN Electronic Journal.
Haslberger, M., J. Gingrich, and J. Bhatia (2023)
"No Great Equalizer: Experimental Evidence on
AI in the United Kingdom Labor Market," unpublished manuscript.
Henkel, O., K. Boateng, A. Mensah, and J. Smith
(2024) "Effective and Scalable Math Support:
Evidence on the Impact of an AI-Tutor on Math
Achievement in Ghana," Journal of Educational
Technology & Society, Vol. 27, No. 2, pp.
112–128.
Hulten, C. R. (1978) "Growth Accounting With
Intermediate Inputs," The Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 45, No. 3, pp. 511–518.
Jones, C. I. (2023) "The A.I. Dilemma: Growth
Versus Existential Risk," NBER Working Paper
No. 31837.
Kaplan, J., S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B.
Brown, B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford,
J. Wu, and D. Amodei (2020) "Scaling Laws
for Neural Language Models," arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08361.
Kestin, G., M. Chen, R. Patel, and D. Weiss
(2024) "AI Tutoring Outperforms Active Learning," NPJ Science of Learning, Vol. 9, Article
34.
Kleinberg, J., H. Lakkaraju, J. Leskovec, J. Ludwig, and S. Mullainathan (2018) "Human Decisions and Machine Predictions," The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 133, No. 1, pp.
237–293.
Gmyrek, P., J. Berg, and D. Bescond (2023) "Generative AI and Jobs: A Global Analysis of
Potential Effects on Job Quantity and Quality," ILO Working Paper No. 96, International
Labour Organization, Geneva.
Lipsey, R. G., K. I. Carlaw, and C. T. Bekar
(2005) Economic Transformations: General
Purpose Technologies and Long-Term Economic
Growth, Oxford University Press.
Lyu, C., Z. Du, J. Xu, Y. Duan, M. Wu, T.
Lynn, A. Fikri Aji, D. F. Wong, S. Liu, and L.
Wang (2023) "A Paradigm Shift: The Future of
Machine Translation Lies With Large Language
Models," arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01181.

23

Merali, A. (2024) "Scaling Laws for Economic Productivity: Experimental Evidence
in LLM-Assisted Translation," arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.02391.
Misch, F., B. Park, C. Pizzinelli, and G. Sher
(2025) "AI and Productivity in Europe," IMF
Working Paper No. 2025/067.
Mollick, E., S. Lee, D. Malhotra, and S. Phadnis
(2024) "AI Agents and Education: Simulated
Practice at Scale," Technical Report EWPE-46,
Elsevier BV.
Mullainathan, S., and Z. Obermeyer (2019)
"A Machine Learning Approach to Low-Value
Health Care: Wasted Tests, Missed Heart Attacks and Mis-Predictions," NBER Working Paper.
Ni, X., Y. Wang, T. Feng, L. X. Lu, Y. Wang, and
C. Zhou (2024) "Generative AI in Action: Field
Experimental Evidence on Worker Performance
in E-Commerce Customer Service Operations,"
available at SSRN.
Nicoletti, G., C. Vitale, and C. Abate (2023)
"Competition, Regulation and Growth in a Digitized World," Technical Report No. 1752,
March.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2008) "Baumol’s Diseases: A
Macroeconomic Perspective," The BE Journal
of Macroeconomics, Vol. 8, No. 1.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2021) "Are We Approaching an
Economic Singularity? Information Technology
and the Future of Economic Growth," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol.
13, No. 1, pp. 299–332.
Noy, S., and W. Zhang (2023) "Experimental Evidence on the Productivity Effects of Generative
Artificial Intelligence," Science, Vol. 381, No.
6656, pp. 187–192.
OECD (2018) "Personalised Pricing in the Digital
Era," Technical Report, October.
OECD (2021) Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning and Big Data in Finance, OECD Publishing, August.
OECD (2023a) AI and the Future of Skills, Volume 2: Educational Research and Innovation,
November.
OECD (2023b) "A Blueprint for Building National
Compute Capacity for Artificial Intelligence,"
Technical Report, February.
OECD (2023c) "Recommendation of the Council
on Artificial Intelligence," https://legalinstrum
ents.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL
-0449.
OECD (2024) "Artificial Intelligence, Data and
Competition," OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 18.
OECD (2025) "Towards a Common Reporting
Framework for AI Incidents," Technical Report
34, Paris.

24

Peng, S., E. Kalliamvakou, P. Cihon, and M.
Demirer (2023) "The Impact of AI on Developer
Productivity: Evidence from GitHub Copilot,"
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06590.
Pizzinelli, C., A. Panton, M. Mendes Tavares, M.
Cazzaniga, and L. Li (2023) "Labor Market Exposure to AI: Cross-Country Differences and
Distributional Implications," IMF Working Paper No. 2023/216.
Rockall, E., M. Mendes Tavares, and C. Pizzinelli
(2025) "AI Adoption and Inequality."
Rogers, E. M. (1962) Diffusion of Innovations,
The Free Press of Glencoe, New York.
Rubinova, S., and M. Sebti (2021) "The WTO
Trade Cost Index and Its Determinants," Staff
Working Paper ERSD 2021-6.
Russo, L., L. Aranda, and S. Berube (2025)
"OECD Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence: Methodology for Measuring In-Country
Public Cloud Compute Capacity for AI," forthcoming.
Sastry, G., L. Heim, H. Belfield, M. Anderljung,
M. Brundage, J. Hazell, C. O’Keefe, G. K. Hadfield, R. Ngo, K. Pilz, et al. (2024) "Computing
Power and the Governance of Artificial Intelligence," arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08797.
Schwarcz, D., S. Manning, P. Barry, D. R. Cleveland, J. J. Prescott, and B. Rich (2025) "AIPowered Lawyering: AI Reasoning Models,
Retrieval-Augmented Generation, and the Future of Legal Practice."
Simone, M. D., F. Adebayo, C. Okeke, and A.
Mensah (2025) "From Chalkboards to Chatbots:
Transforming Learning in Nigeria, One Prompt
at a Time," accessed 17 January 2025.
Suleyman, M., and M. Bhaskar (2023) The Coming Wave: AI, Power and the Twenty-First
Century’s Greatest Dilemma, Crown, New York.
Svanberg, M., W. Li, M. Fleming, B. Goehring,
and N. Thompson (2024) "Beyond AI Exposure: Which Tasks Are Cost-Effective to Automate With Computer Vision?," SSRN Electronic Journal.
Tankwa, B., L. Vazques Bassat, P. BarbookJohnson, and D. Farmer (2025) "Technological
Progress at National Level: Increasing Diffusion
Speeds With Ever-Changing Leaders and Followers," https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract_id=
5099043.
Trammell, P., and A. Korinek (2023) "Economic
Growth Under Transformative AI," Technical
Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Urban, M., R. Tushar, A. Nguyen, and E. Roth
(2024) "ChatGPT Improves Creative ProblemSolving Performance in University Students: An
Experimental Study," Computers & Education,
Vol. 215, Article 105031.

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025

Woolf, A. G. (1987) "The Residential Adoption of
Electricity in Early Twentieth-Century America." The Energy Journal, Vol.8, No. 2, pp. 1930, https://doi.org/10.5547/ISSN0195-6574-E
J-Vol8-No2-2
WTO (2024) "Trading With Intelligence: How AI
Shapes and Is Shaped by International Trade,"
WTO Report.
Zhang, X., M. Johnson, L. Gómez, and P. Singh
(2024) "A Systematic Literature Review of Empirical Research on Applying Generative Artificial Intelligence in Education," Frontiers of Digital Education, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 223–245.

INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY MONITOR

25

Figure A.1: The Relationship Between AI and Productivity at the Worker Level:
Selected Estimates from the Literature

Notes: Firm-level studies focusing on pre-Generative AI. “AI use” is a 0-1 dummy obtained by firm surveys,
while AI patents refers either to a 0-1 dummy for having at least 1 patent (US study) or to the number of
patents in firms (for the EU+UK study, where the average number is 0.48 with 2.6 standard deviation, so that
firms cumulating more than one patents are relatively few). Two of the estimates in the panel (“9 countries,
2016-21”) relate to the same study (Calvino and Fontanelli, 2023), but the second estimate controls for other
ICT technology use and thus better isolates the marginal impact of AI. Given that the study reports separate
estimates for all 9 countries, the median estimate across countries is shown on the Figure. *Controlling for
other ICT technologies.
Source: Filippucci et al. (2024b).

26

NUMBER 48, Spring 2025
