arXiv:2403.12107v1 [econ.GN] 17 Mar 2024

Scenarios for the Transition to AGI∗
Anton Korinek and Donghyun Suh
University of Virginia, Brookings, and GovAI
March 2024

Abstract
We analyze how output and wages behave under different scenarios
for technological progress that may culminate in Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), defined as the ability of AI systems to perform all tasks that
humans can perform. We assume that human work can be decomposed
into atomistic tasks that differ in their complexity. Advances in technology make ever more complex tasks amenable to automation. The effects
on wages depend on a race between automation and capital accumulation.
If the distribution of task complexity exhibits a sufficiently thick infinite
tail, then there is always enough work for humans, and wages may rise
forever. By contrast, if the complexity of tasks that humans can perform
is bounded and full automation is reached, then wages collapse. But declines may occur even before if large-scale automation outpaces capital
accumulation and makes labor too abundant. Automating productivity
growth may lead to broad-based gains in the returns to all factors. By
contrast, bottlenecks to growth from irreproducible scarce factors may
exacerbate the decline in wages.

Keywords: artificial general intelligence, tasks in compute space, automation,
capital accumulation
JEL Codes: O33, E24, J23, O41

∗ We would like to thank Ajay Agrawal, Tamay Besiroglu, Erik Brynjolfsson, Tom Davidson,
Joe Stiglitz and seminar participants at Anthropic, Google, GovAI, and OpenAI for helpful
conversations and comments.

1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in AI promise significant productivity gains, but have also
renewed fears about the displacement of labor. A growing number of both AI
researchers and industry leaders suggest that it is time for humanity to prepare
for the possibility that we may soon reach Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)
– AI that can perform all cognitive tasks at human levels and thus automate
them.1 This raises a number of fundamental economic questions. What would
the transition to AGI look like? What would AGI imply for output, wages, and
ultimately human welfare? Would wages rise or collapse?
Our paper introduces an economic framework to think about these questions
and evaluate alternative scenarios of technological progress that may culminate
in AGI. Our starting assumption is that human work can be decomposed into
unchanging atomistic tasks that differ in how complex they are. Advances in
technology make ever more complex tasks amenable to automation. We capture this by assuming that there is a threshold of task complexity that can be
automated at a given time, captured by an automation index. This index grows
exogenously over time, in line with regularities such as Moore’s Law. Although
our results hold more broadly, we suggest that in the Age of AI, a natural measure of task complexity is the amount of compute (shorthand for computational
resources) required for the execution of a task by machines. Some tasks, such
as adding up numbers in a spreadsheet, can be performed with minimal computation. In contrast, others require a substantial amount of computation for
machines, despite seeming natural and effortless for humans, such as navigating a bipedal body over an uneven surface. We describe how tasks differ in
computational complexity using a distribution function that captures tasks in
complexity space or, referring to our preferred interpretation, tasks in compute
space.2
Throughout the paper, we analyze two opposing cases for the distribution
of tasks in complexity space, which result in sharply different economic outcomes. First, we consider the possibility that human tasks are of unbounded
complexity, illustrated in the left-hand panel of Figure 1. In this case, advances
in the automation index, illustrated by the right-ward movement of the vertical
“frontier of automation,” imply that more and more tasks are automated over
time, but that there always remain tasks and by extension jobs that cannot
be automated. Second, we consider a bounded distribution of task complexity, which reflects that the computational capabilities of the human brain are
finite, as discussed, e.g., in Carlsmith (2020). Bounded distributions result in
full automation within finite time when the frontier of automation crosses the
1 This

includes, for example, the CEOs of the three leading AGI labs, OpenAI’s Sam
Altman, Google Deepmind’s Demis Hassabis, and Anthropic’s Dario Amodei (Kruppa, 2023;
Time, 2024). It also includes the world’s most renowned AI researchers, for example two of
the godfathers of deep learning, Geoffrey Hinton and Yoshua Bengio.
2 Although the computational complexity of tasks is most evident for cognitive tasks, the
automation of physical tasks is also greatly constrained by the computational complexity
involved, as captured, e.g., by Moravec’s paradox (Moravec, 1988). We analyze an extension
that explicitly accounts for cognitive and physical tasks in Section 4.

2

Figure 1: Unbounded and bounded distributions of tasks in complexity space
maximum complexity of tasks performed by humans. An alternative interpretation for tasks being to complex to automate is that society may choose not
to automate certain tasks even when it is feasible to do so. This may apply, for
example, to some of the tasks performed by priests, judges, or lawmakers.
We lay out an economic model in which atomistic tasks are gross complements that are combined to produce final goods. In the spirit of Zeira (1998)
and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018, 2022), all tasks can be performed by labor,
and automated tasks can be performed by either labor or capital. However,
unlike in the described works, our main focus is on the edge cases that arise as
we come close to full automation.
Our analysis begins by examining the equilibrium under fixed supplies of
capital and labor. We show that automation can have dramatic impacts on
wages and output even before it reaches all tasks. There exists a threshold level
of the automation index that separates two distinct regions. As long as the index
remains below the threshold, labor remains scarce relative to capital, and wages
remain high. However, once the automation index surpasses the threshold, the
economy enters a second region, where the scarcity of labor is alleviated, despite
the presence of some tasks that still need to be performed by humans. In this
region, labor and capital become perfect substitutes at the margin so wages
decline starkly to equal the marginal product of capital. The economy exhibits
behavior akin to an AK model.
Next, we characterize the effects of automation on the economy’s factor price
frontier (FPF), which reflects all possible combinations of factor prices that may
result from a given level of technology under different capital/labor ratios. The
FPF provides general insights into the effects of automation that do not depend
on specific assumptions on capital accumulation. We find that for a given level of
automation, wages lie within a bounded interval that expands as the automation
index rises – but only as long as automation is incomplete. Once all tasks are
automated, the factor price frontier discontinuously collapses to a single point at
which the effective returns to labor and capital are equalized. For given factor
endowments, the effects of automation on wages are hump-shaped: for low levels
3

of automation, advances in automation increase wages as the economy becomes
more productive, but for higher levels of automation, wages decline due to the
displacement of labor.
We analyze dynamic settings and show that the effects on wages are determined by a race between automation and capital accumulation. In addition
to the previous two opposing effects on wages from rising productivity and labor displacement, automation also triggers capital accumulation that moves the
economy up on the factor price frontier, increasing wages. We characterize an
upper bound on output and wages that is reached in the limit case that the capital stock can instantaneously adjust to its optimal level whenever automation
advances. We show a powerful analytic result: For any optimizing representative agent with linearly separable intertemporal preferences, the effects of
automation on output and wages will lie between a lower bound captured by
the constant-capital case and the described upper bound.
When the complexity distribution of tasks is bounded, full automation is
reached in finite time and leads to a collapse in wages, no matter what savings
behavior the representative agent pursues. For unbounded complexity distributions of tasks, we show that if the tail of remaining tasks is sufficiently thick,
wages will rise forever. By contrast, if the tail of unautomated tasks is too thin,
wages will eventually collapse.
Next, we simulate a range of scenarios to illustrate our findings numerically.
(Figure 8 on page 24 shows the main results.) We start with a “business-as-usual
scenario,” which captures the traditional notion that a constant fraction of tasks
is automated each period, similar to Aghion et al. (2019). This corresponds to
a Pareto distribution for task complexity together with exponential growth in
the automation index. Since the maximum complexity of tasks in this scenario
is unbounded, true AGI will not be reached in finite time. In our calibration,
both output and wages rise forever in this scenario, at a pace similar to what
advanced countries have experienced over the past century.
Next we consider two AGI scenarios that span the range of estimates provided by Geoffrey Hinton, one of the godfathers of deep learning, who estimated
in May 2023 that AGI may be reached within 5 to 20 years—after declaring that
he had “suddenly switched [his] views on whether these things are going to be
more intelligent than us.” In our “baseline AGI scenario” we assume a bounded
task distribution such that full automation is obtained within 20 year.3 In an
“aggressive AGI scenario” we assume a shorter-tailed distribution that implies
full automation within five years. Our simulation results imply ten times faster
growth than in the business-as-usual scenario, especially in the aggressive AGI
scenario. However, wages collapse as the economy approaches full automation.
In a fourth scenario, we consider the possibility that there is a large bout
of automation in the near term—for example because AI rapidly automates
cognitive jobs—but that there remains a long tail of tasks that are harder to
automate. As a result of the initial bout of automation, the economy enters the
3 As economists, we hope that the computational complexity of at least some atomistic
tasks that go into writing economics papers is far into that right tail. Alas, this might be
wishful thinking.

4

region in which labor loses its relative scarcity value, and wages in our simulation
collapse. However, after capital accumulation has caught up sufficiently, labor
becomes sufficiently scarce again so that the economy returns to region 1 and
wages rise in line with output growth.
We extend our baseline model to analyze several additional important considerations. First, we consider the role of fixed factors (such as minerals or
matter) and show that they may pose a bottleneck that holds back economic
growth and worsens the outlook for wages, ultimately leading to stagnation accompanied by a wage collapse. Next, we add an innovation sector to analyze
the potential for automating technological progress and show that this lifts the
returns of all factors including wages. We illustrate that sufficient automation
may give rise to a growth singularity whereby output takes off.
Furthermore, we analyze societal choices to retain certain jobs as exclusively
human even when they can be automated (e.g., priests and judges), and show
that a sufficient volume of such “nostalgic jobs” may help to keep labor sufficiently scarce so that wages continue to grow even when full automation is
technically possible. We analyze the wage-maximizing rate of automation and
show that slowing down automation in an AGI scenario may deliver significant
gains to workers albeit at the cost of forgoing a growing fraction of output.
Next, we evaluate the impact of automation on workers with heterogeneous
skills and susceptibility to being automated. We find that automation in such a
scenario may give rise to an ever-declining fraction of superstar workers earnings
ever-growing wages, whereas the majority of the labor force is starkly devalued
by automation. Finally, we explore the role of compute as an example of specific
capital that is tailored to automating specific tasks. We observe that in the short
term, compute may earn very high returns, but after an adjustment period
during which sufficient compute has been accumulated (and which may last
long), compute may become just another form of capital that earns the same
return as all other types of capital.
Related Literature The foundational work of Aghion et al. (2019) explores
the impact of artificial intelligence on economic growth, offering valuable insights into how technological advances in AI, including AGI, might influence
future economic trajectories. Jones (2023) underscores the risk of technological progress, emphasizing existential risk—a concept crucial in AGI discussions.
Davidson (2023) analyzes a model of the factors that may lead to a take-off in
economic growth if technology advances near AGI but does not focus on the
wage implications. Besiroglu et al. (2022) show how advances in AI may accelerate growth by speeding up R&D, and Erdil and Besiroglu (2023) review
the factors by which AGI may give rise to exponential growth. Trammell and
Korinek (2023) provide a useful survey on the broader implications of advanced
artificial intelligence on economic growth.
A critical body of literature explores the dynamics between labor and automation. Seminal works by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018, 2022) and Autor
(2019) provide insights into how automation reshapes labor markets, focusing on

5

technology as a substitute for individual worker tasks or how workers and tasks
can complement or substitute for technology. Eloundou et al. (2023) and Felten
et al. (2023) provide excellent empirical analyses of which tasks are amenable
to automation by the current wave of foundation models. These studies offer
a useful lens for understanding the economic implications of AI before AGI is
reached. Our contribution to these strands of literature is to look at the limit
case of what happens if either all work tasks are automated or we asymptote
towards a world in which all tasks are automated.
Our paper is also related to a broader literature on AGI and superintelligence literature. Good (1965) was the first to articulate the potential of an
intelligence explosion if AGI is reached. Bostrom (2014) provides a comprehensive exploration of superintelligence, highlighting the potential capabilities of
AGI and the profound implications these might have for society. Yudkowsky
(2013) discusses several of the economic implications of the transition to AGI.

2

A Compute-Centric Model of Automation

2.1

Tasks in Compute Space

compute /k@m-"pyüt/
verb: to determine by calculation
The system computed the length of the shortest path.
noun: the combined computational resources available for information processing tasks
Modern AI relies on vast amounts of compute.
Etymology: Derived from the Latin verb "computare," meaning "to count,
sum up, or reckon together," the word "compute" entered the English language as a verb in the 16th century. The noun form "compute" gained prominence more recently with the advent of high-performance digital computers
and the increasing need to describe the resources required for computation.
Atomistic Job Tasks A central assumption of our analysis is that the work
performed by humans is composed of tasks and sub-tasks – or unchanging atomistic task – that differ in how easily they are automated. In our baseline model,
we focus on cognitive tasks and their potential for automation. In this setting,
an atomistic task is a well-defined computational assignment that contributes
to the accomplishment of a larger job task.
These atomistic tasks are fundamental and are significantly smaller than
the tasks that are listed in O*Net. Table 1 lists, for example, the top-5 O*Net
tasks of economists: to study data; conduct and disseminate research; compile,
analyze and report data; supervise research; and teach. Each of these O*Net
“job tasks” involves a wide variety of different atomistic tasks. For example, the
O*Net task “teach theories of economics” may require first planning the overall
6

• Study economic and statistical data in area of specialization, such as finance, labor, or agriculture.
• Conduct research on economic issues, and disseminate research findings
through technical reports or scientific articles in journals.
• Compile, analyze, and report data to explain economic phenomena and
forecast market trends, applying mathematical models and statistical techniques.
• Supervise research projects and students’ study projects.
• Teach theories, principles, and methods of economics.
Table 1: Top-5 Tasks performed by economists (O*Net database)
task, recalling different economic theories, synthesizing a structure, preparing
slides, formulating lectures, synthesizing speech and affect, decoding and responding to student questions, preparing problem sets, distributing problem
sets, grading problem sets, and so on—all while keeping track of the plan. It
may also require tasks such as recognizing emotional expressions on students’
faces, using theory of mind to evaluate student progress and dynamically adjust
the structure, etc.
All of these tasks involve a set of basic human brain functions, which constitute a form of computation. Some of these functions are easily performed
by machines and therefore highly susceptible to cognitive automation (Korinek,
2023), whereas others are more difficult. What matters for our purposes here is
how computation-intensive they are using machines.
Recent literature on technology on labor markets observes that innovation
typically gives rise to new job tasks (e.g., Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018; Autor,
2019). This holds true when viewed from the perspective of high-level job tasks
such as those captured by O*Net. However, when viewed from an atomistic
level that reflects basic brain functions, innovation merely recombines atomistic
tasks in novel ways to produce novel high-level tasks and jobs. For example, the
novel task of “prompt engineering” may require atomistic tasks such as defining
a desired output, crafting an initial prompt, entering it, reading the output,
evaluating it, deciding whether to iterate, and finally sharing the output—all
functions that existed long before the invention of generative AI systems that
triggered prompt engineering.
Task Complexity and Compute Intensity Our baseline model emphasizes
differences in complexity as a key dimension when studying the automation potential of tasks. Our preferred interpretation for what makes tasks difficult to
automate is their compute intensity, which refers to the amount of computational resources required to perform a specific task. Compute intensity can

7

Figure 2: Training compute of frontier AI systems over time
(Copyright © 2024 by Epoch under a CC-BY-4.0 license; Sevilla et al., 2022.)
easily be measured by the amount of floating point operations (FLOP) that
need to be executed to perform a given task. The computational complexity
for machines to execute a task often differs starkly from how easy or difficult
it is for humans.4 Still, it is the computational complexity for machines that
determines whether a task can be automated.
Advances in Computing One of the main drivers of recent advances in
AI has been the increased availability of computing power. Moore’s Law, first
described by Gordon Moore (1965), describes that the performance of cuttingedge computer chips doubles approximately every two years. The regularity has
held for the past sixty years. Additionally, the amount of compute deployed in
cutting-edge AI systems has grown even faster over the past decade, doubling
roughly every six months, as shown in Sevilla et al. (2022) and depicted in
Figure 2. Improvements in algorithms have further accelerated the growth in
capabilities of cutting-edge AI systems (Besiroglu et al., 2022).
For our analysis below, we assume that there is an automation index that
captures the maximum complexity of tasks that can be automated. This index grows exponentially at an exogenous rate, mirroring the type of advances
captured by Moore’s Law and Figure 2. As the automation index increases, a
growing mass of tasks can be automated.
4 For example, Moravec (1988) observed that some tasks that feel easy to execute for
humans, such as vision processing, employ a large amount of dedicated grey matter and are,
in fact, computationally quite intensive. There are also certain tasks that require very little
compute in dedicated machines but that are difficult for the human brain since it has not
evolved for them: for example, arithmetic operations take just one FLOP on a basic computer
but require significant amounts of grey matter for human brains to perform, likely involving
the equivalent of billions of FLOP.

8

2.2

Baseline Model

Consider a representative household in a static economy who is endowed with
L = 1 units of labor and K > 0 units of capital. There is a continuum of tasks
that differ in their computational complexity i. The distribution function Φ(i)
reflects the cumulative mass of tasks with complexity ≤ i and satisfies Φ(0) = 0
and limi→∞ Φ(i) = 1. If the distribution function is differentiable, we call its
derivative ϕ(i) the density of tasks of complexity i. Examples are shown in
Figure 1.
To produce aggregate output Y , we combine all the tasks of different complexity using a CES aggregator with elasticity of substitution σ.
σ
 σ−1
Z
σ−1
σ
dΦ(i)
(1)
y(i)
Y =A
i

where y(i) is the amount of type i tasks employed in the production of output. We generally assume σ < 1, reflecting that the atomistic tasks are gross
complements.
Each task is performed using capital k(i) and labor ℓ(i) according to the
production function
y(i) = aK (i)k(i) + aL (i)ℓ(i)
(2)
where the coefficients aK (i) and aL (i) reflect the efficiency of capital and labor.
We assume that the exogenous index I reflects the state of automation and
defines a complexity threshold such that all tasks below the threshold can be
performed with either capital or labor but all the tasks above the threshold
require labor. We normalize the technological parameters aK (i) = aL (i) = 1
except that aK (i) = 0 if i ≥ I. In other words,
(
k (i) + ℓ (i) for i < I
y (i) =
ℓ (i)
for i ≥ I
Strategies The representative agent supplies her endowments of labor and
capital every period at the prevailing factor prices w and R and makes no interesting economic decisions. The representative firm in the economy maximizes
profits by hiring capital k (i) and labor ℓ (i) for each task at the prevailing factor
prices w and R to produce y (i), which is then combined to produce final output.
The firm’s maximization problem is
Z
Z
max Y − R k(i)dΦ(i) − w ℓ(i)dΦ(i) s.t. (1), (2)
k(i),ℓ(i)

i

i

Equilibrium An equilibrium in the baseline model consists of a set of {k (i) , ℓ (i) , y (i)}i≥0
and factor prices w and R such that the representative firm solves its maximization problem and markets for capital and labor clear, i.e.,
Z
Z
k(i)dΦ(i) = K
ℓ(i)dΦ(i) = 1
i

i

9

Since there are no market imperfections, the described equilibrium also constitutes the first-best of the economy.

2.3

Equilibrium: Characterizing Two Regions

Scarcity of Labor For given factor endowments (K, L), there are two possible
regimes for the scarcity of labor, depending on the level of the automation index
I: If the index is low enough so that labor is relatively scarce, then the return
on labor is greater than the return on capital, w > R, and the scarce labor is
employed solely in those tasks that cannot be automated.
Conversely, if the state of automation is sufficiently advanced that only a
small fraction of tasks are exclusive to human labor, then w = R holds, and
labor is employed not only in the remaining unautomated tasks but also in some
of the automated tasks. At the margin, capital and labor are perfect substitutes.
Lemma 1 (Scarcity of labor). For given (K, L), there is a threshold value for
the state of automation Iˆ that is defined by
 
Φ Iˆ =

K/L
1 + K/L

(3)

and increasing in the K/L-ratio such that there are two regions:
ˆ then labor is scarce compared to capital. In this regime,
Region 1: If I < I,
labor is employed only for tasks with i > I. Output is
σ
h σ−1
i σ−1
σ−1
1
1
Y = F (K, L; I) = A K σ Φ(I) σ + L σ (1 − Φ(I)) σ

(4)

and wages satisfy

σ−1

1

1

w = A σ (Y /L) σ · (1 − Φ(I)) σ > R
ˆ then the relative scarcity of labor is relieved, and labor
Region 2: If I ≥ I,
earns the same return as capital w = R = A; if the inequality is strict, some
labor is deployed alongside capital for tasks with i < I, and labor and capital are
perfect substitutes for the marginal task. Output is given by the linear function
Y = F (K, L) = A (K + L)

(5)

Conversely, for given I, there is a threshold κ (I) = Φ(I)/ [1 − Φ (I)] such
that the economy is in region 1 if K/L > κ (I) and in region 2 if K/L ≤
κ(I). The threshold κ(I) is increasing in I, i.e., if K/L is marginally above the
threshold, further automation pushes the economy from region 1 into region 2
where the scarcity of labor is relieved.
Proof. Assume first that all labor is employed in tasks with i ≥ I and observe
that the symmetry of the production function across all tasks implies that an
identical amount of capital k = K/Φ(I) will be employed in each task below
the threshold and an identical amount of labor ℓ = L/(1 − Φ(I)) for each task
10

above the threshold for given aggregate K and L. The production function can
then be written as
σ
i σ−1
h σ−1
σ−1
Y = F (K, L; I) = A k σ Φ(I) + ℓ σ (1 − Φ(I))
σ
h σ−1
i σ−1
σ−1
1
1
= A K σ Φ(I) σ + L σ (1 − Φ(I)) σ

proving equation (4).
The firm’s optimization problem implies the first-order conditions
σ−1

1

1

σ−1
σ

1
σ

1
−σ

1

FK = A σ Y σ · K − σ Φ(I) σ = R
FL = A

Y

·L

1
σ

(1 − Φ(I)) = w

(6)
(7)

By comparing these two expressions, we can see that the return on capital
1
1
1
1
R is less than the return on labor w as long as K − σ Φ(I) σ < L− σ (1 − Φ(I)) σ
or, equivalently, k > ℓ, i.e., the capital assigned to each automated task is
greater than the labor assigned to unautomated tasks. Expressing this in terms
of aggregate supplies of factors, the condition is
K
Φ(I)
> κ(I) :=
L
1 − Φ(I)

(8)

The right-hand side is an increasing function of I that goes from 0 to ∞. By
ˆ
implication, there is a value of I such that the inequality is violated for all I > I.
When that threshold is crossed, it is more efficient to allocate some labor to
tasks with i < I, and the marginal unit of labor is perfectly substituable with
capital. By implication, k (i) = ℓ (i) = K +L, and the CES aggregator simplifies
to equation (5). Alternatively, the threshold for Φ(I) can be expressed explicitly
as an increasing function of the K/L-ratio by solving for
 
Φ Iˆ =

K/L
1 + K/L

The remaining results stated in the lemma follow immediately.
Intuitively, region 1 reflects the world as we have experienced it over the past
200 years, in which capital and labor are complementary in production, and
labor is comparatively scarce. Figure 3 shows that for given factor supplies, a
higher automation index I increases the mass of tasks that can be accomplished
with capital, implying that the available capital is spread over a greater number
of tasks and becomes scarcer. Conversely, automation reduces the mass of tasks
that is exclusive to labor, implying that the available labor can be concentrated
on fewer tasks and becomes less scarce. As the automation index reaches the
ˆ there are so few tasks left that are exclusive to labor that labor
threshold I,
no longer enjoys a scarcity advantage over capital, and the returns on the two
factors are equated.

11

y(i)

y(i)
k

ℓ
I

i

I I′

i

Figure 3: Automation and the scarcity of labor
Note that the threshold Iˆ depends solely on relative factor supplies, not on
the elasticity of substitution σ between capital and labor. As soon as labor is no
longer scarce, it will be used interchangably with capital in the marginal task,
and this holds even when individual tasks are highly complementary as reflected
by low values of the elasticity of substitution (as long as σ > 0).

2.4

Factor Price Frontier (FPF)

For an analysis of the effects of advances in automation I on factor returns, let
us characterize the factor price frontier associated with the firm’s technology.
The factor price frontier depicts all possible combinations of factor prices R and
w that will result from different proportions of factor supplies K and L in a
competitive economy with profit-maximizing firms under a given technology.
Lemma 2 (Factor Price Frontier (FPF)). For a given automation index I, the
factor price frontier slopes downwards, starting from a limiting point w∗ (I) =
1
A(1 − Φ(I)) σ−1 and R = 0 as K/L → ∞ to the point w = R = A when
K/L ≤ κ(I). Increases in A move the FPF proportionately outwards. Increases
in I raise w∗ (I) and swivel the factor price frontier clock-wise.
Proof. We obtain the factor price frontier from the aggregate cost function,
which is the dual of the aggregate production function. The associated unit
cost function represents the minimum cost at which a competitive optimizing
firm can produce one unit of final output, given factor prices w and R. In the
ˆ the unit cost function associated with equation (4) is
region of I < I,
1

 1−σ
1
1−σ
1−σ
R
Φ(I) + w
(1 − Φ(I))
C(w, R; I) =
A

12

w

w

K
L

45◦

w∗



1

A′
A

A

A

A A′

R

R

Figure 4: Factor price frontier and its dependence on A
Since we employed the final good as the numeraire good, this cost function needs
to equal 1 in a competitive economy. The factor price frontier when I < Iˆ is
thus given by all pairs of (w, R) that satisfy the equation C (w, R; I) = 1, or
equivalently,
 1−σ
 1
A
− R1−σ Φ(I) 1−σ
w=
(9)
1 − Φ(I)
Asymptotically, as K/L goes to infinity, we can see from equations (6) and (7)
that the return to capital R goes to zero, whereas the wage converges to
w∗ (I) =

lim

K/L→∞

1
i σ−1
h
1
1
1
1
w = A 0 · Φ(I) σ + (1 − Φ(I)) σ
(1−Φ(I)) σ = A(1−Φ(I)) σ−1

(10)
ˆ the cost function is simply C (w, R; I) = min {w, R} /A,
Conversely, when I ≥ I,
and the factor price frontier is degenerate and consists of a single point w =
R = A.

The factor price frontier is illustrated in Figure 4. The area above the 45
degree line corresponds to Region 1 of Lemma 1, reflecting a high capital-labor
ratio K/L > κ(I) and w > R. Higher capital intensity K/L moves factor
returns up and to the left along the frontier, i.e., it increases w and reduce
R. Conversely, when K/L ≤ κ(I), we enter Region 2 of the lemma, and the
factor price frontier corresponds to a single dot on the 45 degree line at which
w = R = A.
The right panel of Figure 4 shows how an increase in the level of technology
A pushes out the factor price frontier – for any ratio of K/L, it scales the
returns of all factors proportionately. This exemplifies how the factor price
frontier serves as a convenient tool to describe how factor returns are impacted
by technological changes across any levels of factors supplies.

13

The Automation Path on the Factor Price Frontier
We next turn to the effects of automation for a given capital stock K or equivalently, capital intensity k = K/L. Then it is easy to see that:
Lemma 3 (Automation and Output). An increase in automation dΦ(I) raises
ˆ and leaves output unaffected otherwise.
output as long as I < I,
ˆ the result follows by differentiating expression (4),
Proof. For I < I,


σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1
dY
1
=
A σ Y σ · k σ −ℓ σ
dΦ(I) σ − 1
Given σ < 1, the derivative is positive as long as k > ℓ, which is the condition
for being in region 1 in Lemma 1 in which the production function is relevant.
ˆ the relevant production function is (5), which is independent of I.
For I ≥ I,
Intuitively, for output to rise, capital must be sufficiently abundant, delivering a productivity gain from deploying the amply available capital to a greater
number of tasks. This is frequently termed the productivity effect of automation.
Let us look at factor returns next.
Lemma 4 (Automation and Factor Returns). (i) An increase in automation
ˆ The effect on w is hump-shaped: there
dΦ(I) always raises R as long as I < I.
∗
∗
is a threshold I (K/L) with Φ(I (·)) ∈ (0, 1) such that wages w rise in Φ(I) as
long as I < I ∗ (K/L) or, equivalently, as long as K/L > κ∗ (I), but decline in
Φ(I) for I > I ∗ (K/L) or, equivalently, K/L < κ∗ (I).
(ii) For Φ(I) = 0, the return on capital is R = 0, and wages equal w = A.
For Φ(I) ≥ κ/(1 + κ), both equal R = w = A. The latter condition always holds
if Φ(I) = 1.
Proof. The limit results follow readily from equations (6) and (7) and from the
second part of Lemma 1. By differentiating equation (6), with respect to Φ(I),
we can see that automation always raises the return on capital.
To see how automation affects wages, consider the derivative of log w with
respect to Φ from the firm’s optimality condition (7):


σ−1
σ−1
1−σ
d log w
1 1
1
1
=
k σ − ℓ σ (Y /A) σ −
.
(11)
dΦ(I) σ − 1 σ
σ 1 − Φ(I)
The first term reflects the productivity effect of automation, which is positive under condition (8), reflecting that producing the marginal task using
a relatively more abundant k units of capital rather than a scarce ℓ units of
labor increases output. The second term captures the displacement effect of
automation and reduces labor income. It reflects that the labor used in each
unautomated task ℓ = L/(1 − Φ) increases, as captured by the term in the
denominator, thereby pulling down the marginal product of labor.
log w
1
As I rises, wages rise at first—at Φ(I) = 0 we find ddΦ(I)
= 1−σ
> 0. As
ˆ and
I becomes larger, the first term in (4) declines, reaching zero for I = I,
14

w
45◦

R
Figure 5: Factor price frontier and automation
the absolute value of the second term grows and eventually dominates the first
term—in the limit of Φ → 1, the second term becomes infinitely large. Thus,
there exists an intermediate value I ∗ (K/L) after which further automation reduces wages. Notice that the first term is increasing in K/L whereas the second
term is independent of K/L. The threshold can alternatively be expressed as
K/L < κ∗ (I).
Figure 5 illustrates that an increase in automation I “rotates” the factor
price frontier clockwise, for example, from the dotted to the dashed and solid
lines. If the economy is in the labor-scarce region 1 (above the 45 degree line),
automation raises wages for a given return of capital and also the maximum
wage level w∗ (I). For given K/L, the path of factor prices that results from
rising automation I is illustrated by the hump-shaped bold line with arrows
in the figure. Along the path, R rises continually whereas w at first rises but
ˆ
eventually falls. When automation reaches I(K/L),
the economy ends up in the
degenerate equilibrium with w = R = A on the 45-degree line.

2.5

Automation and Factor Earnings

Figure 6 shows the effects of automation on total output for given factor supplies
as well as its split into the wage bill and the total returns to capital. The
horizontal axis depicts the fraction Φ (I) of automated tasks, which goes from
zero to one. The left-hand panel illustrates the case of equal capital and labor
endowments, K = L = 1, and modest complementarity with an elasticity of
substitution σ = 0.5 between the two. As long as the economy is in the scarcelabor region (Region 1), output is a strictly monotonic function of automation.
At first, automation almost exclusively benefits labor, and the returns to capital

15

(a) Equal factor endowments

(b) Abundant effective capital

Figure 6: Static equilibria under rising automation
are minuscule. But as automation increases and we come closer to Region 2,
the wage bill reaches a ceiling and starts to decline. Further automation still
raises output, but the returns to capital grow faster than output, at the expense
of the wage bill. When Region 2 is reached at Φ = 0.5, both factors earn equal
returns. Given equal endowments, this translates into capital and labor shares
of one-half each.
The right panel of the figure shows an alternative scenario in which the
effective supply of capital is ten times higher than labor, i.e., L = 1 and K = 10,
and in which the two are strong complements with σ = 0.2. The abundance of
capital and the strong complementarity imply that the region in which most of
the benefits go to labor is much larger, but so is the drop in the wage bill once a
critical threshold is surpassed: whereas wages seem to be growing exponentially
in Φ (I) up until Φ ≈ 0.80, they experience a precipitous decline by about 85%
starting around Φ ≈ 0.83, accompanied by a meteoric rise in the returns to
capital. When Region 2 is reached at Φ = 10/11, factor returns are equalized,
and given the relative factor endowments, the capital share of the economy is
ten times the labor share. This example highlights that the fate of labor can
change rapidly when certain thresholds are crossed.
Crucially, the effect of automation on output—and per-capita income—
depends on the capital available. In the illustration in the left panel, full automation merely doubles output; in the right panel, output grows eleven-fold.
This observation naturally leads us to the next step of our analysis—to analyze
how automation interacts with capital accumulation in a dynamic setting.

3

Dynamics: The Race between Automation and
Capital Accumulation

The dynamics of output and wages depend not only on technological advances—
captured by the automation index I—but also on capital accumulation and by
extension on the savings behavior of the agents in the economy. This section
16

analyzes these forces in a dynamic setting.

3.1

Automation Scenarios

Progress in automation We assume that the automation index I grows
exponentially over time at an exogenous rate of g, reflecting Moore’s law and
similar regularities. For an initial I0 , the time path of I (omitting the time
index t for conciseness) is given by
I = I0 egt
We can equivalently write that log I = log I0 + gt grows linearly at the rate g.
We consider different distributions Φ (i) of task complexity or tasks in compute space to capture alternative scenarios for the advent of AGI:
Business-As-Usual Scenario (Unbounded Distribution) We model unbounded complexity distributions of tasks Φ (i) as Pareto, implying that log i is
described by an exponential distribution, log i ∼ Exp(λ) with decay parameter
λ. The resulting cumulative distribution function is Φ(i) = 1 − e−λ log i . If the
automation index I grows exponentially at rate g, the fraction of non-automated
tasks declines at rate λ · g. This distribution has an infinite right tail, meaning
that there will always be tasks that cannot be automated.
Baseline and Aggressive AGI Scenarios (Bounded Distributions) For
our AGI scenarios, we assume a bounded complexity distribution of tasks to
capture the scenario that the tasks that can be performed by human brains
is limited by an upper bound so automation crosses the threshold Iˆ within
finite time. We assume that Φ(i) follows a power function Φ(i) = 1 − (1 −
log i/ log I max )β with β = 1 and with normalization I max = I0 egT such that
all tasks are automated after T years.5 Following Hinton’s predictions, we set
T = 20 in the baseline AGI scenario and T = 5 in the aggressive AGI scenario.
For I > I max , we keep Φ(i) = 1 capturing full automation.
Bout of Automation (Mixed Distribution) We consider a fourth scenario
in which rapid advances in AI automate a large fraction of tasks within a short
time span, but in which we assume that there remains an unbounded tail of tasks
that cannot be automated, for example, because of legal or cultural reasons.
Analytically, we assume
above.
 a mixture of the two scenarios

 Specifically,
 Φ(i)
β

is defined as Φ(i) = ω 1 − (1 − log i/ log I max )

+ (1 − ω) 1 − e−λ log i where

ω ∈ [0, 1] is a weight parameter. We assume the same values for the parameters
of the Pareto and power function distributions as in the previous two cases.

5 Power function distributions are a special case of beta distributions with a beta parameter
α = 1.

17

3.2

Consumer Problem

The representative household seeks to maximize its lifetime utility by choosing
consumption Ct over time:
Z ∞
max U =
e−ρt u(Ct )dt
(12)
{Ct }

0

subject to the law of motion for capital:

K̇t = F (Kt , Lt ; It ) − δKt − Ct

(13)

for given K0 . The current-value Hamiltonian for this problem is:
Hc = u(Ct ) + µt [F (Kt , Lt ) − δKt − Ct ]

The first-order conditions with respect to consumption and capital are:
∂Hc
= u′ (Ct ) − µt = 0
∂Ct
∂Hc
= µt [FK − δ] = −µ̇t + ρµt
∂Kt
Differentiating the first optimality condition with respect to time yields u′′ (Ct )Ċt =
µ̇t , and substituting into the second optimality condition gives
Ċt
1
[FK (Kt , Lt ) − ρ − δ]
=
Ct
η(Ct )

(14)

′′

t )Ct
is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.
where η(Ct ) = − u u(C
′ (C )
t

Limit Behavior in Region 2 When the economy is in region 2, then FK = A.
If the agent’s utility function exhibits constant elasticity of substitution η, then
the Euler equation implies a constant growth rate of consumption
gC =

Ċt
A−ρ−δ
=
Ct
η

(15)

Let us assume that A > ρ + δ so consumption growth is positive and consider
the case that the economy remains in region 2 forever—for example, because
full automation Φ(I) = 1 has been reached. Then the economy will converge
towards a balanced growth path in which gY = gK = gC as in (15) and the
savings rate s∞ = 1 − C/Y is constant. From (13), we obtain that
gK =

K̇t
sA(Kt + L)
=
−δ
Kt
Kt

As limt→∞ L/Kt = 0, we can equate gC = gK and solve for the long-run savings
rate
1 ρ + (1 − η)δ
A − ρ − δ + ηδ
s∞ =
= −
Aη
η
Aη
18

Bounds Assume an initial I0 and K0 that satisfy FK (K0 , L; I0 ) ≥ ρ + δ,
i.e., there was no excessive capital accumulation in the past. Then the following
proposition holds for any intertemporal utility function that is linearly separable
as specified in (12) with a twice continuously differentiable, increasing, and
strictly concave period utility function u(C):
Proposition 5 (Bounds for Output and Wages). For any distribution Φ (i) of
tasks in compute space and exogenous growth in the automation index It , the
paths of capital, output, and wages lie between lower and upper bounds K − ≤
Kt ≤ Kt+ , Yt− ≤ Yt ≤ Yt+ and wt− ≤ wt ≤ wt+ .
The lower bounds are defined by the fixed-capital case with K − = K0 ∀t and
−
Yt = F (K − , L, It ), wt− = FL (K − , L, It ). The lower bound on wages first rises
in It and then declines in It . It declines to A in finite time if full automation
is reached asymptotically, i.e., if limI→∞ Φ(I) = 1.

If Φ(It ) < 1, an upper bound Kt+ for capital is defined by FK Kt+ , L, It =
R = ρ + δ ∀t as long as a solution exists; otherwise we set Kt+ = ∞. The upper
bounds for output and wages are Yt+ = F (Kt+ , L, It ) and wt+ = FL (Kt+ , L, It ).
All three upper bounds are increasing in the automation index It . If automation
is full, Φ(It ) = 1, the upper bounds are Kt+ = ∞ and Yt+ = ∞, and the upper
bound on wages discontinuously collapses to wt+ = A.
Proof. Observe that for any twice continuously differentiable period utility function that is increasing and strictly concave, the elasticity in the Euler equation
(14) satisfies η(Ct ) ∈ (0, ∞). Consumption on the optimal path is increasing as
long as FK > ρ + δ and constant when FK = ρ + δ. Our characterization of the
factor price frontier delivers most of the remaining results.
For the lower bound, observe that increases in I and Φ(I) raise the marginal
product FK for given K, triggering additional capital accumulation, which raises
output and wages above the lower bound. For the upper bound, observe that by
the Euler equation, capital accumulation will never exceed the upper threshold
Kt+ , which is given by
1
Aσ L(1 − Φ(It )) σ−1 Φ(It )
+
.
Kt =
σ
(Rσ−1 − Aσ−1 Φ(It )) σ−1

(16)

For given It , output and wages are increasing in Kt , implying that they must
lie between the lower and upper bounds defined by K − and Kt+ . If Φ(It ) = 1,
the production function is AK-style, and Lemma 4 implies that wt = A.
On the factor price frontier, the lower bound on wages w− is pinned down by
the automation path in Figure 5; it collapses to A in finite time if the economy
asymptotically converges to full automation. As long as Φ(I) < 1, the upper
bound on wages wt+ is pinned down by the intersection of the corresponding
factor price frontier with a vertical line at R = ρ + δ and rises without bounds
in I. However, when full automation Φ(I) = 1 is reached, the upper bound
on wages wt+ discontinuously collapses to A, which equals the lower bound
and must therefore equal the equilibrium wage. This result is independent of
19

intertemporal preferences and savings behavior and occurs in finite time if the
distribution of task complexity Φ(I) is bounded, as in our two AGI scenarios.
The Balancing Savings Rate To further investigate the race between automation and capital accumulation, we analyze the threshold at which the wage
effects of automation and capital accumulation precisely offset each other. For
this, we take the total differential of the equilibrium wage, wt = FL (Kt , L; It ),
and set dwt = 0 to find
FKL (Kt , L; It )

dIt
dKt
+ FLI (Kt , L; It )
=0
dt
dt

(17)

Suppose, for simplicity, that δ = 0 so we can denote the savings rate at t by
t
st = K̇t /Yt . Also, note that FLI (Kt , L; It ) dI
dt = FLΦ Φ̇t . Then
st Yt · FKL = −FLΦ Φ̇t
The left-hand side is the increase in wages due to capital accumulation. The
right-hand side is the change in wages due to automation. As we observed
above in Lemma 4, the term FLΦ encompasses the productivity effect and the
displacement effect of automation on wages. Dividing by the cross-derivative
LΦ
FKL , the fraction FFKL
captures the wage effects of automation relative to capital
accumulation. After some algebra, we obtain



1−σ
FLΦ
σ
1
(k/ℓ) σ − κ +
=
k
FKL
1−σ
1−σ
The first term in the brackets is the productivity effect that is increasing in
the relative abundance of capital k/ℓ – if capital is very abundant compared to
labor, then using capital for newly automated tasks significantly raises output.
The second term is the displacement effect that is increasing in κ and thus
in the automation index I. (Recall that for the given level of automation I,
κ (I) = Φ(I)/ [1 − Φ (I)] reflects the threshold of the capital/labor ratio below
which the economy is in region 2 such that the scarcity of labor is lifted.)
Intuitively, if a large fraction of tasks has already been automated, then further
automation of marginal tasks will result in a large fall in labor demand since
the automated labor has to be reallocated to an ever smaller set of human-only
tasks.
By rearranging terms, we obtain the following expression for the savings rate
that, given Φ and g, perfectly offsets the effect of automation on wages



1−σ
σ
K t ϕ t It
1
s̃t =
κ+
−
(k/ℓ) σ ·
·
·g
(18)
1−σ
1−σ
Yt Φt
The condition tells us that, to offset the effect of automation on wages, the
savings rate must be increasing with (i) the displacement effect net of the productivity effect, (ii) the capital-output ratio, (iii) the relative mass of automated
20

tasks at the current compute threshold for task automation, and (iv) the growth
of compute g. Intuitively, a large fraction of output must be invested if (i) the
displacement effect reduces wages significantly, or (ii) there is already a large
amount of capital stock in the economy, or (iii) a large amount of tasks are
being automated, or (iv) automation is fast.
The expression in (18) tells us about the threshold level for the savings rate
at time t above which wages rise and below which wages fall, given the extent of
automation occurring at time t. In other words, it characterizes the short-run
behavior of wages as an outcome of the race between automation and capital
accumulation.
Long-Run Dynamics for Unbounded Task Distributions To further
illuminate the trade-off in (18), we turn to the long-run dynamics of wages. To
do so, we start by characterizing the conditions for the existence of a balanced
growth path (BGP). We define a BPG as an equilibrium path on which output
and capital stock grow at a constant rate and factor shares remain constant.
Lemma 6. Suppose that as t increases, Φ(It ) → 1, and focus on the limit case.
Then the return to capital converges to A. Moreover, output and capital stock
grow at the rate (A−ρ−δ)/η and the savings rate converges to (A−ρ−δ+ηδ)/Aη.
Proof. If the economy is in region 1 in the limit, then the production function
converges to
σ
i σ−1
h σ−1 1
σ−1
1
= AK
lim A K σ Φ σ + L σ (1 − Φ) σ
Φ→1

If the economy is in region 2 in the limit, then F (K, L) = A(K + L). In both
cases,
lim FK = A
Φ→1

As a result, the Euler equation implies
Ċt
1
1
= [FK − ρ − δ] → [A − ρ − δ]
Ct
η
η
as Φ → 1. Output and capital must grow at the same rate, which implies that
the savings rate must satisfy
Ċt
K̇t
s∞ Yt
=
=
−δ
Ct
Kt
Kt
Yt
Since limΦ→1 K
= A, this requires that K̇t /Kt → s∞ A − δ. Therefore, we have
t

1
[A − ρ − δ]
η
A − ρ − δ + ηδ
s∞ =
Aη

s∞ A − δ =

21

gw

Case 3

Case 2

Case 1

A−ρ−δ
η

0

(1 − σ) · A−ρ−δ
η

A−ρ−δ
η

λ·g

Figure 7: Wage growth rate (gw ) as a function of the rate of automation (λg)
Since we are interested in the long-run dynamics of wages, we make a simplifying assumption that the savings rate is given exogenously at a constant
value s∞ , which can be interpreted as the long-run savings rate. Under the
assumption, s is a key parameter determining the rate of capital accumulation. Depending on the value of s∞ relative to the rate of automation g, the
race between automation and capital accumlulation can result in three possible
outcomes. The following proposition summarizes the results.
Proposition 7 (Race between automation and capital accumulation). Suppose
the complexity distribution of tasks is Pareto and that the economy starts in
region 1, i.e., I0 < Iˆ0 . Then the growth of wages and long-run labor shares are
characterized by two thresholds on the rate of automation λg:
1. If λg > A−ρ−δ
then limt→∞ wt = A and the labor share converges to zero.
η
2. If A−ρ−δ
· (1 − σ) < λg ≤ A−ρ−δ
η
η then wages grow exponentially at an

asymptotic rate σ1 A−ρ−δ
− λg and the labor share converges to one.
η
3. Lastly, if λg ≤ A−ρ−δ
·(1−σ) then wages grow exponentially at an asympη
 σ−1

σ
λg
totic rate 1−σ
and the labor share converges to 1 − (A−ρ−δ+ηδ)/η
.
λg
+δ
1−σ

Proof. See Appendix A.1.
Intuitively, the proposition illustrates how wages evolve as the result of a race
between automation and capital accumulation. As observed above, the fraction
22

Parameter
ρ

Value
0.04

η

2

δ

0.1

σ

0.5

A

0.5

L

1

Φ0

0.608

K0

4.6

Description
Discount rate
Risk aversion
parameter
Depreciation rate
Elasticity of
substitution
Total factor
productivity
Labor endowment
Initial fraction of
automated tasks
Initial capital stock

Table 2: Parameter values for the numerical illustration
A−ρ−δ
η

is proportional to the long-run savings rate of the economy. In the
first case, if the rate of task automation λg is too high compared the savings
rate, then the automation index I crosses the threshold Iˆ in finite time and
the economy transitions into region 2, where wages collapse to A and remain
stagnant. If the rate of task automation λg is at an intermediate value, then
wage growth is constrained by capital accumulation. Wages grow perpetually
at rate σ1 ( A−ρ−δ
− λg), which is proportional to the savings rate minus the rate
η
of automation. Finally, if λg is low enough, then the rate of automation rather
than capital accumulation constrains wage growth. In other words, wage growth
depends on how fast automation increases the efficiency of factor allocation and
allows the utilization of abundant capital. Indeed, the growth rate of wages (and
of the entire economy) in this regime is increasing in the rate of automation.
Figure 7 illustrates the three cases in Proposition 7. The figure plots the
long-run growth rate of wages as a function of the rate of automation. If λg
is sufficiently low as in case 1, then the wage growth rate is increasing in the
rate of automation as the upward-sloping part of the curve indicates. Once λg
surpasses the first threshold value, the growth rate of wages starts to decline
as λg increases further. Lastly, if λg surpasses the second threshold value, then
wages do not grow in the long run and stay at A.

3.3

Numerical Illustration

To provide an illustration of the theoretical results, we present simulations of
the four automation scenarios described in Section 3.1. Table 2 summarizes
the parameter values that were common to all the simulations. The first five
parameters are standard in the literature, and L = 1 is a normalization. We
chose Φ0 and K0 to match a 66% initial labor share with capital at its steady
state for that level of technology.
Figure 8 presents the results. Panel (a) shows the traditional automation
23

(a) Business-as-usual scenario

(b) Baseline AGI scenario

(c) Aggressive AGI scenario

(d) Mixed scenario

Figure 8: Simulations of the four scenarios

24

scenario “business-as-usual,” in which Φ(i) reflects a rate of task automation
of λg = 0.01 per year. The upper part of the panel shows the output, split
into the returns to capital (red, upper area) and the wage bill (green, lower
area), on a logarithmic scale. The lower part of the panel shows the fraction of
unautomated tasks 1 − Φ on a logarithmic scale—for panel (a), this is a straight
line, capturing exponential decay. We observe that in the “business-as-usual”
scenario, output grows at approximately 2% per year, and both the returns to
capital and the wage bill rise approximately in tandem (with a small decline
in the labor share due to the effects of automation). Note that this scenario
corresponds to case 3 in Proposition 7, i.e., capital accumulation is sufficiently
fast so that growth is constrained by the speed of automation.
Panels (b) and (c) show the AGI scenarios, in which the fraction of unautomated tasks collapses to zero in 20 or 5 years, respectively. In the baseline
AGI scenario, wages grow slightly during the initial periods but then collapse
before full automation is reached. After the collapse, wages are equal to the
returns to capital, and the economy remains in region 2 where labor and capital
are perfectly substitutable, with steady-state growth of 18% per year. In the
aggressive AGI scenario, the wage collapse happens after about 3 years. Since
the scarcity of labor is relieved earlier than in the baseline AGI scenario, the
growth take-off occurs earlier.
Panel (d) shows the “bout-of-automation” scenario. During the initial periods, a large fraction of tasks are automated, leading to wage collapse similar to
the aggressive AGI scenario as the economy enters region 2—labor is abundant
because of the rapid automation and comparatively low capital stock. However, over time, the economy accumulates more capital, making labor scarcer
again. Around year 9, the economy has accumulated sufficient capital so that
it returns to region 1. Wages rise above A and start growing again in line
with further (slower) advances in automation and further capital accumulation.
This scenario illustrates the possibility that labor demand may collapse due to
rapid automation but recover later because of a long tail of tasks that cannot
be automated.

4

Extensions

4.1

Fixed Factors and the Return of Scarcity

If labor is dethroned as the most important factor of production, it becomes useful to disentangle the remaining factors, which have traditionally been lumped
together into “capital” in the economic models of the Industrial Age. Let us
distinguish between factors that are in fixed supply and factors that are reproducible and can therefore be accumulated. We continue to call all reproducible
factors “capital,” including compute, robots, power plants, and factories. By
contrast, factors in fixed supply include land, space, minerals, or solar radia-

25

tion.6 It is difficult to predict which scarce factors will matter the most in an
AGI-powered future – in the short term, it is likely that microchips and the semiconductor fabrication equipment (“fabs”) used for producing these chips will be
bottlenecks, but these are clearly reproducible. By contrast, the raw materials
going into the production of chips, for example certain rare earth minerals, are
irreproducible. In the longer-term, matter or, equivalently, energy (E = mc2 )
may be the ultimately source of scarcity.
For the purposes of our analysis, we incorporate a fixed factor in our analysis that we label M for minerals or matter. We assume that the aggregate
production function is a Cobb-Douglas aggregator of the task composite and
M,
Y =A

Z

y(i)

σ−1
σ

dΦ(i)

i

σ
 σ−1
·α

M 1−α

(19)

where α ∈ [0, 1] is the share of the composite among total output. Then, a
version of Lemma 1 applies, separating two regimes:
Lemma 8. For given (K, L), the automation threshold Iˆ is defined by (3) as in
the original lemma and is independent of M . It defines two regions:
ˆ then labor is scarce compared to capital and employed only
Region 1: If I < I,
for unautomated tasks. Output is given by
σ
i σ−1
h σ−1
·α
σ−1
1
1
M 1−α
Y = F (K, L, M ; I) = A K σ Φ(I) σ + L σ (1 − Φ(I)) σ

(20)

Wages and the returns to M satisfy

σ
h σ−1
i σ−1
·α−1
σ−1
1
1
1
1
w = αA K σ Φ(I) σ + L σ (1 − Φ(I)) σ
L− σ (1 − Φ(I)) σ M 1−α > R

Q = (1 − α)Y /M

ˆ then the relative scarcity of labor is relieved; if the inequality
Region 2: If I ≥ I,
is strict, labor and capital are perfect substitutes for the marginal task. Output
is given by
Y = F (K, L, M ) = A(K + L)α M 1−α

(21)

Wages and the return to M satisfy
w = R = αA(K + L)α−1 M 1−α
α

Q = (1 − α)A(K + L) M

(22)

−α

Proof. The proof follows along the same lines as the proof of Lemma 1.
6 During the Industrial Age, labor was considered in fixed supply at the relevant times
scale – raising humans took so long that their supply could be approximated as exogenous –
whereas human capital was a reproducible factor.

26

The presence of the fixed factor M does not affect the key characteristics
of the production function described in Lemma 1 such as the threshold for the
automation index beyond which labor is no longer scarce compared to capital.
Similar results apply for the effects of automation on wages:
Lemma 9 (Automation and Wages with M ). For given capital intensity K/L,
ˆ The effects on
an increase in automation dΦ(I) always raises R for I < I.
∗
∗
w is hump-shaped: there is a threshold I (K/L) with Φ(I (·)) ∈ (0, 1) such
that wages w rise in Φ(I) as long as I < I ∗ (K/L) but decline in Φ(I) for
I > I ∗ (K/L). The threshold I ∗ with M is lower than in Lemma 4. In the limit
cases of Φ(I) = 0 and Φ(I) ≥ κ/(1 + κ), wages are given by (22). The limit is
reached for any K/L ratio if Φ(I) = 1.
Proof. The effect of automation on wages for a given K/L-ratio is similar to
Lemma 4:

 

σ−1
σ−1
1−σ
σ
1
1
1
d log w
σ
σ
=
α−1
k
(23)
−ℓ
(Y /A) σ −
dΦ(I)
σ−1
σ
σ 1 − Φ(I)
σ
The only difference is the multiplicative term σ−1
α − 1, which is smaller than
1
σ−1 for α < 1. Thus, the productivity effect is smaller with the fixed factor M ,
meaning that wages start to decline at lower levels of I.

Although the presence of a fixed factor preserves the key results on the
automation threshold and the wage effects of automation, the long-run dynamics
of the economy change—for the worse. In particular, we find that wages will
always decline to the return on capital as the economy will always enter region
2 in finite time.
Proposition 10. If lim Φ(I) = 1, then the economy enters region 2 in finite
time, and wages equal the returns on capital w = R = ρ + δ. The labor share
equals αL/(K ∗ + L), where K ∗ is defined by
w = R = αA(K ∗ + L)α−1 M 1−α = ρ + δ
Proof. If the economy is in region 2 after some finite time T , it will converge
towards a steady state in which (K ∗ +L) are pinned down by the Euler equation
(14), resulting in the expression above. We observe that K ∗ is the maximum
capital level that an optimizing agent will accumulate in this economy since
FK < ρ + δ for any region 1 allocation, as can be seen from the economy’s
factor price frontier. This implies that the economy will enter region 2 no later
than when the automation threshold reaches the scarcity of labor threshold Iˆ
ˆ = K ∗ /L/(1 + K ∗ /L), as defined in Lemma 1.
s.t. Φ(I)
Intuitively, Proposition 10 tells us that if there is a fixed factor then automation eventually outpaces capital accumulation regardless of the distribution of
tasks. This contrasts with Proposition 7, which shows that wages may grow
indefinitely if a sufficient amount of tasks is always left to labor.
27

Figure 9: Factor shares with fixed factor M in traditional scenario
Figure 9 illustrates the implications under the assumption that the CobbDouglas for M is (1 − α) = .10 in the “traditional scenario,” in which a constant
fraction of tasks is automated every period. As can be seen, wages peak after
about 10 years, and the economy enters region 2 after 25 years, slowly converging to the steady-state level of capital K ∗ . In stark contrast to our simulation
results in Section 3, this illustrates that even though there is an infinite tail of
unautomated tasks, the presence of a fixed factor bottlenecks capital accumulation and implies that labor loses its scarcity status in finite time.

4.2

Automating Technological Progress

Our analysis so far has focused on automation as the only form of technological advancement and has taken as given the technology parameter A, which is
considered as the main driver of productivity gains in the neoclassical growth
model. This has allowed us to derive a number of powerful results on the effects
of automation in goods production on output and wages. However, there are
widespread predictions that advances in AI not only will make output production more efficient but also will speed up technological progress (Aghion et al.,
2019; Agrawal et al., 2023; Davidson, 2023).
At the most basic level, the production of R&D that drives technological
progress consists of atomistic computational tasks—like any other production
process described earlier in the paper. For example, Agrawal et al. (2023) suggest that scientific hypothesis generation can be viewed as the making of predictions over a vast combinatorial space. We denote the complexity distribution
of tasks involved in R&D by the distribution function “Gamma” Γ(i), which
may differ from the complexity distribution of tasks Φ(i) involved in producing
output—perhaps R&D involves on average more complex computational tasks.
W.l.o.g., we assume that our ability to automate both R&D and production are
captured by the same automation index I.
Building on our earlier task production function and on the endogenous
28

growth setup of Jones (1995), we assume that advances in the technology parameter A are driven by an ideas production function combining atomistic computational tasks {x(i)} that involve computational complexity as reflected in
the distribution function Γ(i),
Z
log Ȧ = log Aθ + log x(i)dΓ(i),
where the parameter θ captures the potential for knowledge spillovers or for
decreasing returns to knowledge accumulation. Similarly with the production
of final goods, we assume that automated tasks can be performed by either
capital or labor whereas unautomated tasks require labor,
(
kA (i) + ℓA (i) for i < I,
x (i) =
ℓA (i)
for i ≥ I.
To keep our analysis tractable, we assume that there is an exogenous supply
of knowledge workers LA = 1 that can only work in ideas production in addition
to the unit supply of workers LY = 1 who are solely engaged in final output
production. Moreover, we assume unitary elasticity of substitution between
tasks in the output production function so σ = 1. Analogs of lemma 1 hold
for both production functions. As long as labor is scarce (region 1), we observe
that the production functions of final output and knowledge satisfy F (K, L) ≃
Φ(I) 1−Φ(I)
Γ(I) 1−Γ(I)
AKY LY
and Ȧ ≃ Aθ KA LA
where KY and KA are the aggregate
amounts of capital employed in final output or knowledge production.
Following the hypothesis of Aghion et al. (2019) and the proof of Trammell
and Korinek (2023), it can then be shown that once automation in the two production functions has proceeded sufficiently, growth in the described economy
will experience what Aghion et al. (2019) term a “type II singularity.” The intuition is that a rapidly growing capital stock generates an explosion in R&D
output and technological progress that feeds on itself, resulting infinite output
in finite time. The following proposition states this result formally under the
assumptions of a constant savings rate s ∈ (0, 1), a constant allocation of capital
across final output and ideas production, and no depreciation for tractability.
Proposition 11. The economy enters a path of super-exponential growth in
technology A and output Y that diverges to infinity in finite time once the automation index I reaches the level I ♡ such that

Γ I♡
>1
(1 − Φ (I ♡ )) (1 − θ)
The marginal product of labor in the production of final output diverges to infinity alongside output.
Proof. Observe that once the described threshold has been passed, the producΦ(I ♡ ) 1−Φ(I ♡ )
Γ(I ♡ ) 1−Γ(I ♡ )
tion functions F (K, L) ≃ AKY
LY
and Ȧ ≃ Aθ KA
LA
for
29

Figure 10: Output and wage growth under technological progress
constant fractions of capital KY = cK and KA = (1 − c)K are lower bounds
for the actual production functions using the (still increasing) automation level
Φ(I) and Γ(I). The result is then a direct application of the proof in Trammell
and Korinek (2023) (Appendix B.2). Note that wt ≥ At no matter if output
production is in Region 1 or Region 2 as defined in Lemma 1. Therefore the
marginal product of labor in the production of final output also diverges to
infinity.
The condition in the proposition depends on three parameters – sufficient automation in the production of ideas Γ(·), sufficient automation in the production
of final output Φ(·), and sufficient returns to the accumulation of knowledge.
Remarkably, as long as the production of final output has been sufficiently automated (sufficiently high Φ), the remaining two parameters can take on any
finite levels. This highlights that sufficient automation in the production of final output and thus capital accumulation will always lead to an explosion in
growth.
Figure 10 illustrates the path of wages under a CES production function
for output and optimal savings, numerically illustrating the explosive path of
output growth and type-II singularity that we identified in the proposition. The
convexity of the curve on a log-scale indicates that the growth rate of wages is
ever-increasing due to the acceleration of technological progress. (Note that the
log scale hides that the labor share of output is declining.) In the figure, we
have cut off the simulation at t = 10. The singularity occurs shortly thereafter.
In summary, even if automation induces wages to collapse to the returns to
capital at A, rapid technological progress from the automation of R&D allows
workers to benefit from the advancement of AI once sufficient automation has
taken place.
More generally, the force described in this subsection is plausible, and sufficient progress in AI will likely indeed lead to rapid technological advances and
30

increases in living standards. At the same time, it is also likely that both the production of output and of ideas will eventually be bottlenecked by fixed factors,
as we emphasized in Section 4.1. A model that comprehensively incorporates
both effects is beyond the scope of this paper.

4.3

Nostalgic Jobs or Limits on Automation

Our baseline model assumed that the automation of work was driven solely by
technological factors, occurring as soon as the compute requirements of performing specific tasks were reached. However, even if it is technologically feasible to
perform certain tasks, our society may decide that it is preferably for those tasks
to remain exclusively human. For example, Korinek and Juelfs (2023) observe
that jobs such as priests, judges, or lawmakers may remain exclusively human
long after the time when they can be performed at equal or superior levels by
machines, labelling such jobs “nostalgic jobs.”
For the purposes of our analysis, we assume that there is a separate distribution function Ψ(I) that captures how far the automation index I must
advance for society to choose to automate task I – in addition to the distribution Φ (I) capturing the technological possibility of automation. The inequality Ψ (I) ≤ Φ(I) reflects that society can only choose to automate tasks that
are feasible to automate. The inequality is strict if there are tasks that could
be automated from a technical perspective but aren’t for societal reasons. If
limI→∞ Ψ(I) < Φ(I) ≤ 1, then this captures that there are tasks that humans
choose to never automate even though they could be.
The described setup can also capture situations in which tasks are delegated
to machines with a delay, i.e., for higher levels of the automation index I than
what is technologically feasible. Korinek and Juelfs (2023) describe two reasons for why this may occur: First, as the capabilities of machines to perform
certain tasks become better and better than human abilities, it may become
increasingly untenable for the tasks to be left to humans. For example, if AI
systems demonstrably become much fairer judges with fewer biases and noise
than human judges, it may become untenable to leave many judicial deicisons
to error-prone humans. Second, with sufficient advances in robotics, it may
become more and more difficult to distinguish humans and AI-powered robots
performing human services. They observe that a robot priest with greater emotional intelligence than humans and a more comprehensive theory of human
minds than a human priest may be able to perform the tasks typically performed by human priests quite perfectly, or intentionally somewhat imperfectly
so as to not give away that it is a robot. Both of these categories require that
the performance of AI systems is sufficiently above human levels, corresponding
to a sufficiently high level of the automation index I.
Maximizing Wage Growth Consider the problem of a government with
the objective to maximize wage growth by imposing limits on automation and
choosing an optimal path Ψ(I) ≤ Ψ(I). The following result characterizes the
optimal Ψ(I) among all Pareto distributions—given exponential advances in
31

the automation index I, this amounts to the government choosing an optimal
constant rate of automation per time period.
Proposition 12 (Maximizing Wage Growth). Suppose Ψ is a Pareto distribution defined as Ψ(It ) = 1 − I0−λ e−λgt where I0 is the initial automation index
and λg is the rate of task automation. Then the long-run growth rate of wages
, assuming that Ψ(I) ≤ Ψ(I)∀I for this
is maximized for λg = (1 − σ) · A−ρ−δ
η

.
distribution. As a result, wages grow at rate A−ρ−δ
η

Proof. The proof follows from Proposition 7. The rate of automation is lowest
in case 3. And the wage growth rate is increasing in λg. Thus, the wage growth
. Once λg surpasses (1 − σ) · A−ρ−δ
,
rate increases until λg = (1 − σ) · A−ρ−δ
η
η
at which the growth
the growth rate of wages decreases in λg until λg = A−ρ−δ
η

rate equals zero. Therefore, the maxmum growth rate of wages is A−ρ−δ
at
η
. Figure 7 on page 22 provides a graphical illustration of
λg = (1 − σ) · A−ρ−δ
η
this finding—the peak of the wage growth rate as a function of λg is A−ρ−δ
.
η

Figure 11 shows what happens if we slow down progress in the “baseline AGI
scenario” from Section 3 so that wages growth is maximized. Up until period 14,
a wage-maximizing planner is constrained by the natural pace of automation and
sets Ψ(I) = Φ(I) over that stretch. After that point, the baseline AGI scenario
implies rapid declines in the labor share, but the planner sets Ψ(I) < Φ(I) to
slow down effective automation. The left panel of the figure shows the paths of
output and wages, and the right panel depicts the two variables in relative terms
for the two scenarios. Up until period 14, the paths in the two scenarios roughly
coincide (with a minor gap opening since the AGI scenario triggers rapid capital
accumulation in advance of the economy achieving full automation). Thereafter,
the wage-maximizing planner obtains a path of exponentially growing wages,
as predicted by the proposition, whereas wages in the AGI scenario collapse.
Notably, the right-hand panel also illustrates the output cost of foregoing the
possibility of full automation. As can be seen, the output cost of holding back
automation is low at first, but eventually, almost 100% of the output potential
of the economy is lost by holding back automation.
Our finding illustrates that slowing down automation may be a powerful
tool to increase wages, albeit it comes at the cost of reducing output growth.
The described policy is feasible under both of the AGI scenarios simulated in
the previous section and always results in exponentially growing wages instead
of the collapse wihin a matter of years that would otherwise occur when AGI
automates human tasks too quickly.

4.4

Heterogeneous Worker Skills

When labor is heterogeneous, individuals are hit by the effects of automation
at different times, depending on the extent to which their skills are automated.
In practice, workers differ along many different dimensions, and each worker’s
labor may be complemented or substituted for in different ways by technological
32

Figure 11: Comparison of output and wages under Φ and Ψ
advances. One of the classical ways of accounting for heterogeneity in the labor
market, going back to Katz and Murphy (1992), is to split workers into skilled
and unskilled based on a threshold level of educational attainment. An additional distinction, introduced by Autor et al. (2003), was to categorize workers
according to whether they hold cognitive or manual jobs performing routine
or non-routine activities. Under the described paradigm, we could capture the
distribution of tasks in compute space separately for each of the resulting buckets (e.g., routine cognitive workers), and analyze how advances in computing
capabilities will affect that type of workers. Recent advances in AI have raised
the possibility that many cognitive tasks, including non-routing tasks, may be
automated relatively soon (e.g. Korinek, 2023). However, ongoing advances in
robotics make it likely that non-routine manual jobs will be similarly affected to
cognitive tasks by the recent wave of progress in foundation models (Ahn et al.,
2022).
For our purposes here, we found it useful to consider labor that differs in
uni-dimensional but continuous manner. We assume that workers differ in an
exogenous parameter that we label skill J, which reflects the maximum level of
task complexity that the worker can perform. Workers’ skill levels are described
by the distribution function Υ(J). For analytical simplicity, we assume that
Φ(I) ≥ Υ(I).7
For a level of the automation index I, a fraction Υ(I) of workers are perfectly substitutable by machines and earn wage wj = A. A fraction 1 −
Υ(I) is not substitutable, but given that the remaining workers are sufficiently
skilled, they are all effective substitutes for each other and earn wage wj =
FL (K + Υ(I), 1 − Υ(I)). In contrast to our baseline model, this captures the
concern that automation may make workers on the lower rungs of the skill distribution redundant, whereas workers who are able to perform at higher levels
of skill may benefit from automation.
In the long run, assuming less than full automation (Φ(I) < 1 for any fi7 This assumption implies that for any level of automation I, there are sufficiently many
skilled workers at all unautomated complexity levels left so that we can treat unautomated
workers as perfect substitutes for each other.

33

nite I), the share of workers who are gainfully employed will decline over time
and will asymptote to 1 − limJ→∞ Υ(J), i.e., only workers who can perform
unautomated tasks with arbitrary computational complexity will earn higher
returns than capital. If Υ(J) = 1 for finite J, then the role of all human labor
will lose its scarcity value in the same manner as in the AGI scenarios in our
baseline model. Conversely, if Υ(J) asymptotes to 1, then there may be evergrowing inequality among workers: an ever-declining fraction of workers at the
top may see incomes rise without bounds, whereas a fraction of the population
that asymptotes towards one will see wages collapse to the level that equates
the return on capital A.
Heterogeneity in both skill and productivity The described setup could
easily be extended to include heterogeneity in individual worker productivity in
addition to heterogeneity in skill. Assume that workers not only have different
skill levels Jj but are also endowed with different efficiency units of labor Lj per
time period. This may capture, for example, that there may be two economists
who can both write papers up to complexity J, but one of them is twice as fast
at it than the other. This could explain the empirial observation that workers
in the same occupation sometimes earn significantly different wages.
Complementary human capital An alternative lens that may be relevant
in the current era of cognitive automation is that workers possess different levels
of human capital that is affected by automation. To keep our discussion simple,
assume again that each worker j is characterized by a skill level Jj as well as
an exogenous amount of human capital Hj > 0, which enables them to supply
Lj = Hj efficiency units of labor per time period. As the automation index
I surpasses a given worker with skill level Jj , the human capital that they
possessed is fully devalued. The loss is greater and more painful for workers
with more human capital.

4.5

Compute as Specific Capital

An important feature of the ongoing AI take-off is the scarcity of compute. In
our baseline model, we followed the standard neoclassical practice of modeling
capital as uniform, capable of being deployed in the production of any task. As
illustrated in Figure 3, automation of new tasks then implies that the existing
capital stock can be smoothly allocated to a larger number of tasks, unlocking
immediate productivity gains.
In practice, however, many types of capital are specific to the task for which
they were created and difficult or impossible to reallocate, corresponding to what
the literature has traditionally called putty-clay capital.8 In the current context,
the most salient type of specific capital on which AI systems rely is compute,
which is in very limited supply, slowing down the deployment of AI systems
8 The notion was first introduced by Leif Johansen (1959) – once putty has been turned
into clay, it cannot be turned into another shape – and expanded by Solow (1962) and others.

34

Figure 12: Specific capital and factor prices
for new tasks. Another example of specific capital is organizational capital,
including the capital derived from investments into developing new processes
for deploying new technologies in firms.
We expand our framework by assuming that each unit of capital investment
is specific to a task i and can only be invested once the task is automated, i.e.,
once I ≥ i. This leaves the task production function (2) unaffected but modifies
the capital accumulation constraint: instead of a single law of motion for capital
(13), the consumer needs to separately keep track of each type of capital k (i)
since capital that is deployed for one task cannot be redeployed later. In an
economy in which automation is proceeding slowly and steadily, the consumer
problem is unchanged as the resulting constraints on capital redeployment are
slack—every instant of time, a density ϕ(It ) of new tasks is automated, and
sufficient capital for those tasks is instantaneously accumulated. By contrast,
if the economy experiences a bout of progress that leads to a discrete mass of
tasks suddenly being amenable to automation, the accumulation of the relevant
specific capital may lag behind. The rapid rise of LLMs at the time of writing
may be an example of such a bout.
To illustrate this analytically, assume that a discrete mass of tasks ∆t =
Φ(It ) − Φ(It− ) > 0 is automated at time t, and let us interpret the specific
capital k(It ) required for these tasks as compute. At time t, no compute has

35

been accumulated yet, k(It ) = 0, so all type-It tasks are performed by humans at
wage w, even though they could technically be automated. Figure 12 illustrates
the factor returns as a function of the accumulation of compute k(It ) while
holding the inputs of labor and other capital constant: at first, k(It ) = 0, and
the economy starts out at the left side of the figure where labor and compute
are, at the margin, perfect substitutes so the returns on the two are equated.
The rental rate on traditional capital is comparatively low.
Over time, compute capital k(It ) is accumulated and progressively substitutes for labor. As long as compute remains below the first threshold k(It ) < k1 ,
illustrated by the first vertical line in the figure, labor and compute remain perfect substitutes at the margin, but wages w decline with the addition of more
compute, whereas the return on traditional capital rises. Within this region, all
capital investment goes into compute. Once sufficient compute (k1 ) is accumulated so that all humans are replaced from type-It tasks, all labor is allocated to
the remaining unautomated tasks with i > It , and the marginal product of compute decouples from wages. All capital investment continues to be devoted to
compute; wages wt and the returns to traditional capital rise whereas the return
on compute k(It ) declines sharply until it reaches the marginal product of all
other types of capital. This is the middle region between k1 and k2 where only
the return on compute, captured by the dotted curve, is decreasing. Once the
second threshold is passed, the marginal product of compute and other capital is
equated. Any additional capital investment is spread proportionately across all
types of specific capital k(i), i ≤ I, and leads to a decline in the return on capital. In summary, the race between automation and capital accumulation leads
to a non-monotonic response of wages, depicted by the blue curve marked with
dots, and the returns to traditional capital, depicted by the red curve marked
with squares.
The following proposition characterizes the thresholds for the amount of
specific capital and summarizes the non-monotonic response of factor prices to
the accumulation of this specific capital analytically.
Proposition 13 (Specific capital and factor returns). Suppose that the current
amount of the specific capital is given by k(It ). There are threshold values k1 and
k2 > k1 such that (i) if k(It ) < k1 then the wage decreases and the rental rate
of the traditional capital increases with k(It ), (ii) if k1 ≤ k(It ) < k2 then both
the wage and the rental rate of traditional capital increase with k(It ), and (iii)
if k(It ) ≥ k2 then specific capital k(It ) is only accumulated alongside traditional
capital, and the wage increases with capital accumulation.
Proof. See appendix.
In summary, rapid advances in automation may lead to episodes in which
certain types of specific capital (like compute) may exhibit very high returns,
but since capital is reproducible, the resulting accumulation of specific capital
will ultimately dissipate the excess returns. The implication is that after an
adjustment period, specific capital for newly automated processes will be just
another form of capital earning the market rate of return.
36

5

Conclusions

This paper models the economic impact of the transition torwards artificial
general intelligence on output and wages. We develop a compute-centric framework that represents work as consisting of tasks that vary in their computational
complexity and study how exponential growth in computing power will affect
automation and the advent of artificial general intelligence (AGI).
The paper illuminates how different plausible assumptions about the complexity distribution of tasks across "compute space" translate into dramatically
different scenarios for economic outcomes. If the task distribution has an infinite
Pareto tail, reflecting unlimited complexity of human work, then the we show
that wages can rise indefinitely if the tail is sufficiently thick, as capital accumulation automates ever more complex tasks but there always remains enough for
human labor. However, if the Pareto tail is too thin, then automation ultimately
outpaces capital accumulation and causes a collapse in wages.
Moreover, if the complexity of tasks humans can perform is bounded, mirroring computational limits on human cognition, then we demonstrate that wages
would at first surge as machines displace more and more human labor, but would
eventually collapse, even before full AGI is reached.
Beyond these scenarios, the paper provides several powerful general insights.
Using the economy’s factor price frontier, we show that the effects of automation
follow an inverse U-shape, first increasing wages by utilizing abundant capital
but eventually decreasing wages due to labor displacement. We show that sufficient capital accumulation is essential to prevent automation from depressing
wages. Adding fixed factors like land causes wages to eventually decline. Yet
automating innovation itself can restart wage growth after an initial automationdriven collapse.
The novel compute-centric approach opens up a new perspective for analyzing the economic impact of artificial intelligence. Interesting next steps include
incorporating labor and capital adjustment costs, modeling endogenous innovation, analyzing distributional impacts more fully, studying macroeconomic
dynamics and policies, and evaluating the possibility of an intelligence explosion with AGI.
By presenting several rigorous scenarios for how the transition to AGI may
unfold, we hope that this paper will make an important contribution to enabling
economists, policymakers and the public to examine alternative futures and to
prepare for the technological transformations on the horizon.

References
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2018). The race between machine and man: Implications of technology for growth, factor shares and employment. American
Economic Review, 108(6):1488–1542.
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2022). Tasks, automation, and the rise in US
wage inequality. Econometrica, 90(5):1973–2016.
37

Aghion, P., Jones, B., and Jones, C. (2019). Artificial intelligence and economic
growth. In Agrawal, A., Gans, J., and Goldfarb, A., editors, The Economics
of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, pages 237–290. NBER and University
of Chicago Press.
Agrawal, A. K., McHale, J., and Oettl, A. (2023). Artificial intelligence and
scientific discovery: A model of prioritized search. Working Paper 31558,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ahn, M., Brohan, A., Brown, N., Chebotar, Y., Cortes, O., and others (2022).
Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances.
Autor, D. (2019). Work of the past, work of the future. AER Papers and
Proceedings, 109:1–32.
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. (2003). The skill content of recent technological change: An empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4):1279–1333.
Besiroglu, T., Emery-Xu, N., and Thompson, N. (2022). Economic impacts of
AI-augmented R&D. arXiv:2212.08198.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford
University Press.
Carlsmith, J. (2020). How Much Computational Power Does It Take to Match
the Human Brain? Open Philanthropy.
Davidson, T. (2023). What a compute-centric framework says about AI takeoff
speeds. Working Paper.
Eloundou, T., Manning, S., Mishkin, P., and Rock, D. (2023). GPTs are GPTs:
An early look at the labor market impact potential of large language models.
Erdil, E. and Besiroglu, T. (2023). Explosive growth from ai automation: A
review of the arguments.
Felten, E. W., Raj, M., and Seamans, R. (2023). How will language modelers
like ChatGPT affect occupations and industries? SSRN Working Paper.
Good, I. J. (1965). Speculations concerning the first ultraintelligent machine.
In Alt, F. L. and Rubinoff, M., editors, Advances in Computers, volume 6,
pages 31–88. Academic Press.
Jones, C. I. (1995). R & D-based models of economic growth. Journal of Political
Economy, 103(4):759–784.
Jones, C. I. (2023). The A.I. dilemma: Growth versus existential risk. Working
Paper.

38

Katz, L. F. and Murphy, K. M. (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963–1987:
Supply and demand factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1):35–78.
Korinek, A. (2023). Language models and cognitive automation for economic
research. NBER Working Paper, 30957.
Korinek, A. and Juelfs, M. (2023). Preparing for the (non-existent?) future of
work. In Justin Bullock et al., editor, forthcoming, Oxford Handbook of AI
Governance. Oxford University Press.
Kruppa, M. (2023). Google DeepMind CEO says some form of AGI possible in
a few years.
Moore, G. E. (1965). Cramming more components onto integrated circuits.
Electronics Magazine, 38(8).
Moravec, H. (1988). Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence. Harvard University Press.
Sevilla, J., Heim, L., Ho, A., Besiroglu, T., Hobbhahn, M., and Villalobos,
P. (2022). Compute trends across three eras of machine learning. In 2022
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–8.
Time (2024). When might AI outsmart us? it depends who you ask. Time
Magazine, page Jan. 19.
Trammell, P. and Korinek, A. (2023). Economic growth under transformative
AI. NBER Working Paper.
Yudkowsky, E. (2013). Intelligence explosion microeconomics. Technical Report
2013-1, Machine Intelligence Research Institute, Berkeley, CA.
Zeira, J. (1998). Workers, machines, and economic growth. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 113(4):1091–1117.

39

A

Proofs and Additional Results

A.1

Proof of Proposition 7

To begin with, we show that the growth of capital stock is approximately exponential at some constant rate. If the economy is in region 1, the production
function is CES. After some algebra, the growth rate of capital is

K̇t
=
Kt



σ−1
σ

st A Kt

1
σ

Φt + L

σ−1
σ

(1 − Φt )

Kt

1
σ

σ
 σ−1

−δ

σ
 σ−1

1
σ−1
1
− σ−1
σ
σ
σ
σ
L
(1 − Φt )
−δ
= st A Φt + Kt

σ



 σ1  σ−1
1
σ−1
σ−1
Φt
σ
σ
= st A 1 + L
Kt
· Φtσ−1 − δ
1 − Φt

Note that the growth rate of capital stock depends on the behavior of Ωt ≡

 σ1
σ−1
Φt
Φt
σ
grows approximately at an exponential
Kt
. In particular, 1−Φ
1−Φt
t

rate under the Pareto assumption because

Φt
1 − It−λ
=
1 − Φt
It−λ
Itλ − 1

= I0λ eλgt − 1
≈ I0λ eλgt

We consider three cases and see whether each case is consistent with derivation
above. First, suppose Ωt → ∞. Then capital stock must grow at a sufficiently
low rate at least for large t. That is, the long-run growth rate of capital gK
must satisfy
λg
gK <
1−σ
In this case, the growth rate of capital is
σ

 σ−1
K̇t
→ sA 1 + 0
·1−δ
Kt

= s∞ A − δ

where s∞ is the long-run savings rate defined in Lemma 6. Then we have
λg
and thus the following upper bound on the long-run
gK = s∞ A − δ < 1−σ
savings rate


1
λg
∞
s <
+δ
A 1−σ
40

Secondly, consider the case where Ωt → 0. Then capital stock must grow at
a rate such that
λg
gK >
1−σ
In this case, the growth rate of capital converges to a negative value
K̇t
→ sA · 0 · 1 − δ
Kt
= −δ
But this contradicts the lower bound on gK and puts an upper bound on the
growth rate of capital stock.
Lastly, suppose Ωt converges to a nonzero constant. Then it must be the
case that
λg
gK =
1−σ

K̇t
∞
which requires Ωt → Ω where Ω is some constant satisfying Kt → s A 1 +
σ
  σ−1
σ−1
λg
σ
L
Ω
−δ = 1−σ
. In the three cases, capital stock grows asymptotically
at either s∞ A − δ or λg/(1 − σ).
To characterize the long-run labor income share, note that the labor share
is
LSt =

wt L
Yt
σ−1

1

1

A σ (Yt /L) σ (1 − Φt ) σ L
=
Yt
σ−1

1

σ−1

− σ−1
σ

= A σ Yt σ

−1

1

1

L1− σ (1 − Φt ) σ
σ−1

1

L σ (1 − Φt ) σ

−1
σ−1
1
σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1
1
− σ−1
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
=A
A
Kt Φt + L
(1 − Φt )
L σ (1 − Φt ) σ
= A σ Yt

=
=



σ−1

1

σ−1

1

Kt σ Φtσ + L σ (1 − Φt ) σ
σ−1

σ−1

1

L σ (1 − Φt ) σ
1

σ−1

1

Kt σ Φtσ + L σ (1 − Φt ) σ
σ−1

=

σ−1

Kt σ



Φt
1−Φt

σ−1

=

L σ


1
σ

σ−1

+L σ

L σ

σ−1

Ωt + L σ

41

−1

σ−1

1

L σ (1 − Φt ) σ

In the first case, Ωt → 1 and so LSt → 0. In the second case, Ωt 
→ 0
σ−1
1
and so LSt → 1. Lastly, in the third case, Ωt → K̄ σ I¯σ . Since s∞ A 1 +
σ−1

L σ

σ
  σ−1
λg
− δ = 1−σ
, it follows that
Ω

∞



λg
1−σ
σ



  σ−1
σ−1
1
λg
= ∞
+δ
1+L σ
Ω
s A 1−σ



σ−1  σ
σ−1
1
Ω+L σ
λg
= ∞
+δ
Ω
s A 1−σ
σ

 σ−1
Ω
s∞ A
= λg
σ−1
Ω+L σ
1−σ + δ
σ

 σ−1
σ−1
L σ
s∞ A
1−
= λg
σ−1
Ω+L σ
1−σ + δ
 ∞
 σ−1
σ−1
σ
L σ
s A
1−
=
σ−1
λg
Ω+L σ
1−σ + δ
 ∞
 σ−1
σ−1
σ
L σ
s A
σ−1 = 1 −
λg
Ω+L σ
1−σ + δ

s A 1+L

Therefore, LSt → 1 −
as

σ
  σ−1
−δ =
Ω



σ−1
σ

s∞ A
λg
1−σ +δ

 σ−1
σ

=1−



(A−ρ−δ+ηδ)/η
λg
1−σ +δ

 σ−1
σ

.

If the economy starts in region 1 then the economy stays in region 1 as long
˙
Iˆt
I˙t
≥
It
Iˆt

That is, the threshold grows faster than the automation index. Under the Pareto
assumption, the inequality is equivalent to
1 + Kt /L
K̇t
≥
· λg
Kt
Kt /L
t /L
where 1+K
Kt /L converges to one from above. Thus, the above inequality delivers
a lower bound on the savings rate for the economy to asymptotically stay in
region 1:
s∞ A − δ > λg
(24)

The inequality ensures that capital accumulation is sufficiently fast compared
to automation. If it is violated then It crosses Iˆt eventually and wages collapse
to A.
42

To further examine how capital accumulation and automation shape the
asymptotic behavior of wages, consider the growth rate of wages

derived from wt = FL and

ẇt
1 Ẏt
1 Φ̇t
=
−
wt
σ Yt
σ 1 − Φt

1
1
1
log(Y /A) − log L + log(1 − Φ(I))
σ
σ
σ
1 d log Y
1 d log(1 − Φ(I))
d log FL
=
+
dt
σ dt
σ
dt
1 d log Y
1 1
=
+
(−Φ̇)
σ dt
σ1−Φ
log FL = log A +

. The above equation shows that the growth rate consists of output growth and
the displacement effect of automation. Note that the growth rate of output is


Ẏt
Φ̇t
K̇t
1
1 − Φt
= SK
+
SL − SK
Yt
Kt
1 − σ 1 − Φt
Φt
where SK ≡

σ−1
1
Kt σ Φtσ
σ−1
1
σ−1
1
Kt σ Φtσ +L σ (1−Φt ) σ

and SL ≡

σ−1
1
L σ (1−Φt ) σ
σ−1
1
σ−1
1
Kt σ Φtσ +L σ (1−Φt ) σ

, omitting

time subscripts for notational simplicity. The first term is growth due to capital
accumulation and the second term is growth due to the productivity effect of
automation. The wage growth rate is then




K̇t
Φ̇t
ẇt
1
1
Φ̇t
1 − Φt
SK
=
+
SL − SK
−
(25)
wt
σ
Kt
1 − σ 1 − Φt
Φt
1 − Φt
That is, wages rise as long as capital accumulation and the productivity effect
dominate the displacement effect. In fact, this is another version of (18), which
can be seen by setting ẇt = 0, and tells us what determines the growth rate of
wages. Under the Pareto assumption, we have




ẇt
1
K̇t
1
1 − Φt
=
SK
+
· λg · SL − SK
− λg
wt
σ
Kt
1−σ
Φt
where λg is the rate of automation adjusted by the decay rate of the fraction of
tasks for labor.
Notice that
(∗)
SK =
σ−1
(∗) + L σ
If λg > (1 − σ)(s∞ A − δ) (i.e. the first case in the beginning of the proof) then
SK → 1 since (∗) → ∞. Note that




ẇt
1
K̇t
1
1 − Φt
=
SK
+
· λg · SL − SK
− λg
wt
σ
Kt
1−σ
Φt
43

As t → ∞, the growth rate of wages converges as follows




ẇt
1
1
→
1 · (s∞ A − δ) +
· λg · 0 − 1 · 0 − λg
wt
σ
1−σ


1 ∞
=
s A − δ − λg
σ
∞
Thus, if s∞ A−δ > λg (but
 grow exponentially
 s A−δ < λg/(1−σ))

 then wages

at an asymptotic rate σ1 s∞ A − δ − λg = σ1

A−ρ−δ
− λg
η

.

In the case where capital stock asymptotically grows at λg/(1 − σ), SK
converges to one. As a result, the growth rate of wages converges as follows




ẇt
1
1
λg
+
· λg · 1 − SK − SK · 0 − λg
→
SK
wt
σ
1−σ 1−σ


1
λg
λg
=
SK
+
· (1 − SK ) − λg
σ
1−σ 1−σ


1 λg
=
− λg
σ 1−σ
λg
=
1−σ
∴

ẇt
λg
→
wt
1−σ

If s∞ A − δ ≤ λg then wages decline until the automation index crosses the
threshold and collapse to A, as (24) indicates.

A.2

Proof of Proposition 13

Proof of Proposition 13. The production function can be written as
σ

 σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1
σ−1
1
1
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
Yt = A Kt Φ(It− ) + K(I)t ∆t + L
(1 − Φ(It ))

1

 σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1
σ−1
1
1
1
−1
FK = A Kt σ Φ(It− ) σ + K(I)t σ ∆tσ + L σ (1 − Φ(It )) σ
Kt σ Φ(It− ) σ

1

 σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1
1
σ−1
1
1
−1
FK(It ) = A Kt σ Φ(It− ) σ + K(I)t σ ∆tσ + L σ (1 − Φ(It )) σ
K(I)t σ ∆tσ

1

 σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1
σ−1
1
1
1
1
σ
σ
σ
FL = A Kt Φ(It− ) σ + K(I)t ∆t + L σ (1 − Φ(It )) σ
L− σ (1 − Φ(It )) σ

44

If FL < FK(It ) , then the specific capital and labor are perfectly substitutable.
That is,
K(It )
∆t
<
L
1 − Φ(It )
K(It )
L
k(It ) =
<
∆t
1 − Φ(It )
in which case, the production function can be written as
σ

 σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1
1
σ
Yt = A Kt Φ(It− ) σ + (K(It ) + L) σ (1 − Φ(It− )) σ

If FK > FK(It ) , then the specific capital and the traditional capital are perfectly
substitutable. That is,
K(It )
∆t
>
Kt
Φ(It− )
K(It )
Kt
k(It ) =
>
∆t
Φ(It− )
in which case, the production function can be written as


Yt = A (Kt + K(It ))

σ−1
σ

1
σ

Φ(It ) + L

45

σ−1
σ

(1 − Φ(It ))

1
σ

σ
 σ−1
